... title: Organisms as Unities are Gestalts of Biological Perception



Abstract

It is often taken for granted that the process of scientific inquiry involves extracting facts from the natural world. The common view is one of scientists observing the world from a position of detachment, developing theories and testing them with evidence to deduce truth. This rendering is, of course, oversimplified. In reality, the process is not a simple linear progression from observation to fact.

One complication that is often not obvious to non-scientists is the inherently social nature of scientific work - in order for research to proceed, there must be consensus amongst a group of practitioners regarding standards, foci and methods. Furthermore, the fundamental view of the world held by scientists in one community must be aligned - basic metaphysical components and kinds of things are agreed. In other words, an ontology and a style of perception are created [1,2]. In this view of scientific practice, science changes from a practice of observation and recording to one of collective fact construction.

In order to make the best use of science, we must account for scientific perception - what does the world look like to a given scientist and why? What informs their understanding of nature?

In my thesis, I am developing the idea that organisms as unities are gestalts of biological perception. There are a number of instances in which the common view that one organism = one body is not sufficient to explain various phenomena. I will, therefore, develop the notion of organisms existing in multiplicity, embedded in their environments [3]. This view goes against the notion of organisms as pre-existing objects, ready to be discovered by natural scientists in one given form. It is rather the idea that we construct them in various forms according to our thought style [2]. 

[1] T. S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 3rd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996.
[2] L. Fleck, Genesis and Development of a Scientific Fact. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1979.
[3] F. Varela, “Organism: A Meshwork of Selfless Selves,” Org. Orig. Self, pp. 79–107, 1991.

