... title: Philosophical Approaches to Scientific Representation



Abstract

How scientists employ representation? How scientific representation is characterized in philosophy of sciences? These questions are particularly relevant for cognitive sciences, a field in which representations are are both object of studies and elements of their conceptual framework. Despite the computational-representational understanding of the mind is a core assumption in the field, cognitive sciences are nowadays highly influenced by some antirepresentational views of cognition of enactivism. These views, though, provide unsatisfactory explanations of higher level forms of cognition such as scientific cognition. Thus, an alternative account of these higher domains needs to be developed to understand how cognitive sciences gain knowledge. Considering recent views in philosophy of science and Husserlian phenomenology of theoretical acts, this research sketches some of the main characteristics of scientific representation that could underlie their use in cognitive sciences.

Recent analytic philosophy of sciences proposes two approaches to scientific representation: semantic and pragmatic views. Semantic views assert that models, more than theories, are currently the means of scientific representation, which is a relation between a source (or vehicle) and a target system. Semantic views assert that models represent target systems either in terms of isomorphism or similarity. Pragmatists criticize this account for being unable to justify the degrees and respects in which similarity matters, nor the parameters of isomorphism. Pragmatists introduce agents as a third element in the representational relationship. For pragmatists, agents intend to use models for some purposes [1]. In that sense, similarity and isomorphism are only scientific strategies for explaining how models stand for their target systems. 

For pragmatists, representations are accomplishments of their users. Hence, they are interested in the question: in virtue of what representation is achieved? Models' construction plays a crucial role because it is related to their representational power. Besides, target systems do not exist before models' construction and they are at most hypothetical systems. Some pragmatists believe that nothing substantial can define the representational relationship (deflationism) [2]. This stance remains too minimalist to assess the epistemic value of model [3], although it recognizes the intentionality of models in terms of directedness.

Husserlian phenomenology provides a more substantial account of the intentionality of scientific acts. It states that empirical sciences are directed at nature, i.e., the set of spatiotemporal things. What characterizes a theoretical attitude is a function of knowledge that explicitly intends to apprehend its object by postulating its existence. This idea could lead to a realistic view of how models represent their target systems. However, phenomenology recognizes that scientific acts and representations are grounded in intuitive presentations of things. Science, then, is a mediated cognition that is fulfilled only in an inductive, fallible and approximate way. Nevertheless, knowledge is not less true for being mediated. Phenomenology bets for a continuity between scientific and non-scientific cognitions in which the first is considered a privileged cognition that has means of foundation that cannot be found in experiential knowledge. In this sense, phenomenology – unlike enactivism– can provide an account of the continuity of forms of knowledge, which comprises both abstract knowledge and the most basic forms of sensible intuition.

## References
[1]	R. Giere, "An agent-based conception of models and scientific representation". *Synthese*, vol. 172, pp. 269-281, 2010.
[2] 	M. Suárez, "Scientific representation: Against similarity and isomorphism", *International Studies in the Philosophy of Science*, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 225-244, 2003.
[3] 	T. Knuuttila, "Modelling and representing: An artefactual approach to model-based representation", *Studies in History and Philosophy of Science*, vol. 42, pp. 262-271, 2011.

