... title: A Theoretical Study of the Hippocampal Microcircuitry.



Abstract

The brain is a very complex organ whose emergent functions cannot be deduced by simply unravelling the mysteries of its constituent cells.  The function of the brain emerges due to its intricate circuitry, the connections and the modification of those connections.  Access to and modification of such cellular components and circuitry is no easy task.  Hence, data-driven computational and simulation neurosciences were developed to create the possibility to conduct such research on virtual models built from existing experimental findings. Available data, however, is often sparse, unstandardized and difficult to visualize.  It is therefore the scope of the first part of this thesis to focus on data mining and detailed literature review to create an adequate knowledge base of the microcircuitry of the area of the brain mainly responsible for episodic memory encoding and retrieval – the hippocampus proper.  The data will be graphically represented in a schematic interactive diagram including both connectome details and plasticity potential and mechanisms.  As a secondary aim of this project, incomplete data will be highlighted, possibly motivating the filling of those knowledge gaps through further experimental research. 
Visually, the schematics will be represented in superimposed layers, each shedding light on varying levels of information including anatomical layers, neuron locations, densities, morphologies and electrophysiological and synaptic properties.  Special focus will be placed on the CA1, CA2 and CA3 areas and on the main hippocampal pathways of the mouse brain while ensuring that the origin of the data is clearly stated and properly referenced within the schematic diagram.  The theoretical research and graphical implementation are still in progress. 
In the final part of the project, the above-mentioned diagram will be tentatively utilized to investigate further how plasticity in the hippocampus plays a role in episodic memory encoding.  Computational models of the hippocampus such as the *Sparse large-scale nonlinear dynamical model* by Song and colleagues [1], have already shown great potential for their integration within memory prosthesis.  In a brief theoretical study, we wish to gain more insight on how well plasticity is represented in such models and what could be the repercussions of having misrepresented or unrepresented plasticity in memory prosthesis.  Both neuroscientific and psychological perspectives will be considered. 

[1]  D. Song, B. S. Robinson, R. E. Hampson, V. Z. Marmarelis, S. A. Deadwyler and T. W. Berger. “Sparse large-scale nonlinear dynamical modelling of human hippocampus for memory prosthesis”. * IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering*, vol. 26, no.2, pp. 272-280, 2018

