... title: The Role of Theta Oscillations in Prefrontal Cortex During Semantic Retrieval: tACS Study



Abstract

Neural oscillations are crucially involved in neuronal communication and computations that are necessary for the complex cognitive functions and adaptive behaviour. Semantic cognition is a fundamental system that enables complex process of semantic retrieval of information. Recent studies have demonstrated that neuronal theta oscillations in prefrontal perisylvian brain regions may play a pivotal role in binding of semantic representations. However, theta oscillations have been also associated with the involvement of cognitive control and working memory functioning which putatively support controlled semantic processing. Thus, the functional role of theta oscillations in semantic retrieval remains poorly understood. The causal role of theta oscillations in semantic retrieval requires a systematic modulation of the endogenous brain oscillations. For this purpose, transcranial alternating current stimulation, an external frequency-specific modulator of endogenous cortical fluctuations, represents suitable approach. In the present study, we applied active and sham tACS over the left inferior frontal cortex and the contralateral supraorbitary region to evoke modulate prefrontal theta oscillations at 6Hz (θ-tACS) over the inferior frontal cortex in n=27 healthy participants. The tACS conditions were delivered in separate sessions using a pseudo-randomized and properly balanced cross-over experimental design. Participants completed tasks assessing automatic and controlled retrieval performance in three blocks within each session before, during and immediately after the stimulation. Our findings indicate that θ-tACS significantly facilitated retrieval tasks involving automatic processes (i.e., delivering free and unconstrained associations) but impaired controlled retrieval that required cognitive control (i.e., the inhibition of habitual responses and switching between semantic sets). Our study provides an important experimental evidence indicating that neuronal theta oscillation may constitute a neurocognitive mechanism for semantic binding, rather than cognitive control. We conclude that theta oscillations over the left prefrontal cortex may support well-established semantic connections or strengthen their metastable activation, which enhances fluent retrieval. These conclusions should be supported by further empirical research.

