... title: Visual Representations in Working Memory



Abstract

The longitudinal research project Visual Representation in Working Memory (ARRS grant WM.VR) is conducted by Observatory and Mind and Brain Lab of the University of Ljubljana. In the earlier phases of the study the investigators have developed a grounded theory that the co-researchers’ use of strategy for performance of a visual span task is greatly dependent upon their background feelings, their attitude towards the task itself, etc. In order to test this theory, two research questions were formed: 1) What kind of strategies do the co-researchers use while solving a visual span task; and 2) what are the co-researchers background feelings in relation to the task? Co-researchers solved a visual span task where the report procedure was varied. The first report procedure consisted of choosing the test stimulus from four options. In the second report procedure, the co-researchers had to reconstruct the stimulus on a blank matrix. The difficulty of the task gradually increased. After a random example the solving was stopped and an empirical phenomenological interview was conducted. In the interview, co-researchers reported on their lived experience during the last sample. 18 people participated, each giving multiple reports which ensured 64 samples of experience (32 for each task condition). The research is currently in the phase of inductive coding according to the principles of qualitative analysis. What follows is detailed analysis, formulation of results, and validation which is in our case especially important. In line with the principles of first-person research, researchers ought to strive to be theoretically naïve (i.e. start from raw data, rather than theoretical preconceptions), which in this case is impossible, because the study was designed with the intention of evaluating a specific grounded theory. To ensure the validity of the results, a number of validity criteria described by Petitmengin et al. [1] will be used: 1) Debriefing interview of the phenomenological interview itself (based on criteria described in detail by Kordeš & Demšar [2]); 2) Consensual validation; 3) Independent replication of formed categories; 4) Neurophenomenological confirmation. Validated results will lead to further development of the grounded theory. Possible confirmation of the theory would have great implications for future investigation of visual working memory as well as related psychological phenomena such as meta-cognitive awareness. The study also indicates that in future research more detailed description of inner experience ought to be included even if the experience itself is not directly the object of investigation.

Literature:
[1]C. Petitmengin, A. Remillieux, & C. Valenzuela-Moguillansky. “Discovering the structures of lived experience” Phenomenology and the Cognitive Science, December, 2018. [Online serial]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11097-018-9597-4 [Accessed May 2019].
[2]U. Kordeš & E. Demšar. “Excavating belief about past experience: Experiential dynamics of the reflective act.” Constructivist Foundations, vol. 13, no. 2, p. 219–229, March, 2018. [Online serial]. Available: http://constructivist.info/13/2/219 [Accessed May 2019].

