... title: Comparison of Chosen First-person Research Method’s Horizons



Abstract

Phenomenology is a field of study that studies the structure of experience and best ways that we can go about apprehending it. Over the years, different methods have tried to approach the observation and report of our experience in different ways. One of the main problems is the elimination or reduction of the influence we have on our experience when we go about observing it. Can we study our experience even though any reflection of it may change it? How can we determine to what extent a certain approach influences the experience and final results of the study and what is the best way to study it? 

Phenomenological approaches differ in the way they epistemologically and methodologically approach collection of phenomenological data. Final results of the study can be influenced by the way we choose the participants and topic of the study, the way the interviewer and interviewee collaborate and how the collected data is analyzed. [2] There are also differences in the way methods conceptualize consciousness, as they don’t agree whether pre-reflective dimension of experience is valid to be verbally reported and studied. [2] Instead of looking at observation as something that distorts the experience that is being observed, we can look at it as something that co-determines the final results and is an intrinsic characteristic of observation. [1] This way we can study the horizons of phenomenological approaches and determine how they co-create the final results. In order to empirically test such way of conceptualizing phenomenological research, meta-analysis of established phenomenological researches needs to be done first. 

I will compare horizons of Hurlburt’s Descriptive experience sampling method, Petitmengin’s micro-phenomenology and Ericsson and Simon’s Think-aloud protocol method, by comparing the theories of consciousness that the methods use, the way they methodologically go about collecting experiential data and the results they get from the studies using the methods. 

[1] U. Kordeš, E. Demšar, "Excavating Belief About Past Experience: Experiential Dynamics of the Reflective Act", in Constructivist Foundations, vol.13, no.2, pp. 305-314., March 2018. 

[2] T. Froese, C. Gould, A.K. Seth, “Validating and Calibrating First- and Second-person Methods in the Science of Consciousness”, in Journal of Consciousness Studies, vol.18, no.2, pp. 38-64,  January 2011.

