... title: Student Reflection in an Intercultural Higher-Education Context



Abstract

##Context

Due to the worldwide increase of mobility and migration of students, educational institutions are becoming a microcosm of society where intercultural interaction could be a challenge. Nevertheless, they are also a place to develop skills to succeed and respond properly to the demands of our globalized society. In this line, the capacity of reflection is often presented as a crucial skill in developing students’ awareness of their own cultures assumptions and openness towards other cultures and thereby, the development of intercultural competence, which requires affective (attitudes), cognitive (knowledge) and behavioral (skills) elements [1]. The concept of reflection has not an agreed definition since it has many approaches at least from constructivist, enactivist and learning theories views; however, they agree in recognizing that reflection (1) requires active engagement on the part of the individual; (2) is triggered by an unusual or perplexing situation or experience; (3) involves examining one’s responses, beliefs and premises in light of the situation at hand; and (4) supports the integration of new understanding into one’s experience [2]. However, the role of reflection in educational contexts has not been empirically assessed thoroughly and lacks critical analysis. 

##Purpose

The present research aims to identify and analyze the mentioned characteristics of reflection in a higher-education context and their correspondences to the development of intercultural competence. 

##Method

The purpose will be reached from a qualitative approach by analyzing 16 semi-structured interviews which contain reflective and descriptive questions. The process will be as follows [3]: (1) the discovery phase consists of reading the data, searching for reflective processes, developing typologies and a history guide; (2) the coding phase consists on the codification and categorization of the data concerning reflection. Finally, (3) the relativization phase consists of interpreting the data considering the context in which they were collected. 

##Implications

A better understanding of the role of reflection to the development of intercultural competence could support the implementation of intercultural strategies into educational curriculums which allow students to develop skills to communicate effectively and appropriately in intercultural situations.

##References

[1] D. Deardorff (ed.), The SAGE Handbook of Intercultural Competence. California: SAGE Publications, 2009.
[2] R. Rogers, “Reflection in Higher Education: A Concept Analysis”, Innovative Higher Education, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 38-57, 2001.
[3] S. Taylor & R. Bodgan. Introduction to Qualitative Research Methods: The Search for Meaning. New York: Wiley, 2000.

