... title: Deception and Thermal Imagers



Abstract

The scientific widespread search for deception detection, in the sense of detecting deliberate attempts to mislead others, has long been and is still a present struggle of everyday life. It has been found that “lying is an extremely complex social behaviour that does not involve only one cognitive process, but rather a combination of several, such as working memory, inhibition and response monitoring [1].” The right indicators of deception can be revealed with specific verbal and nonverbal behaviour or more specific, with the help of physiological signals that can be measured with a vast variety of technologies. In our study, we are investigating deception detection while placing more emphasis on psychophysiological measures with the use of a non-invasive “thermal imaging technology, which can be used to detect stress levels in humans based on a thermal map of their face [2].” In the empirical part of the laboratory study, our goal is to evaluate the accuracy of the recognition of psychophysiological responses during the narration of true and untrue stories. The research protocol begins and ends with the conduct of a semi-structured interview to make participants more comfortable with the environment. Before measurement, the participant fills out the STAI-X1 (State-Trait Anxiety Inventory) questionnaire about the level of anxiety, followed by the central part of the survey. In the first part, there is the control measurement, when the participant answers a set of neutral and comparative questions. The second part follows the narration of a true and an untrue story where we use the technique of a stimulated cognitive load, as the participant has a maximum of two minutes for preparation. We assume that between stories there is a noticeable temperature difference on the narrator’s face with regard to the selected regions of interest (ROI), and that the simultaneous use of various measuring instruments (a thermographic camera, an electrodermal activity (EDA) meter, a heart-rate, and a finger temperature meter) helps to identify the deceitfulness. Despite the possible unconvincing empirical results gathered with the designed study, we would also like to make an overview in the field of a psychophysiological assessment of misleading with a critical approach to the use of these measuring instruments.

References
[1] M. Gamer and W. Ambach, “Deception research today,” Frontiers in Psychology, vol. 256, no. 5, pp. 1-3, March 2014. Available: https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00256. [Accessed May 5, 2019]

[2] B. A. Rajoub, R. Zwiggelaar, “Thermal facial analysis for deception detection,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 1015-1023, 2014.

