... title: State-dependent Modulation of Social Reward



Abstract

Across species, social interactions and behaviours constitute a major part of the living activities of animals. This striking social motivation can be partly explained by the rewarding function of interpersonal interactions: Social interactions can make us feel good, they satisfy primary needs and they promote affiliation which guarantees wellbeing and adaptation. In humans, nevertheless, the cognitive, affective and neural processes that underly the pursuit of *social rewards* aren’t well understood. We report a behavioural study that tackles this issue by investigating how peoples *motivational state* modulates social reward processing. A recently proposed neurobiological model of social motivation suggests, that differences in affiliative behaviours of animals can be explained by their current state [1]: In an aversive motivational state, social contact-seeking mainly serves the function of coping with distress, whereas in an appetitive motivational state, social contact-seeking mainly acts as a mean to establish joy and pleasure, yielding different behavioural consequences. We expand these recent findings from animal research by testing the proposed model on human subjects. Therefore, we investigate how the induction of aversive and appetitive motivational states effects *wanting* (motivation to gain a reward) and *liking* (affective reaction of receiving a reward) components of social reward processing. To manipulate their motivational state, participants undergo different modified versions of the Trier Social Stress Task [2]. Subsequently, participants perform a newly developed social reward task in which they receive *social touch* on their forearm, seemingly delivered by an affiliated friend. We assess wanting and liking of the delivered touch with self-reports, effort-measures and by recording participants facial activity. It is hypothesized, that in an aversive motivational state, participants use the delivered touch primary as a mean to cope with distress, which would be reflected in higher wanting of social touch compared to a control group. Participants in an appetitive motivational state are expected to use the touch primary as a source to gain joy and pleasure, which would be likewise reflected in higher wanting of social touch compared to a control group, but also in higher liking of the social touch compared to the aversive state group. The proposed study would close a neglected gap between animal and human research on social reward processing and may foster our understanding of its underlying cognitive and affective processes.
##References
[1]	G. E. Loseth, D.-M. Ellingsen, and S. Leknes, “State-dependent μ-opioid modulation of social motivation,” *Frontiers in behavioral neuroscience*, vol. 8, p. 430, 2014.
[2]	C. Kirschbaum, K. M. Pirke, and D. H. Hellhammer, “The 'Trier Social Stress Test'--a tool for investigating psychobiological stress responses in a laboratory setting,” *Neuropsychobiology*, vol. 28, no. 1-2, pp. 76–81, 1993.

