... title: The Terror Management Theory (TMT) under the Perspective of Professions That Deal with Death on a Daily Basis



Abstract

The Terror Management Theory (TMT) states that human awareness of the inevitability of death has cognitive, emotional and behavioural consequences. In this regard, one’s knowledge of the fact that one will someday die and that death can come at any time for any number of unpredictable and uncontrollable reasons is the *terror* in people’s minds that is managed unconsciously [1].

In order to buffer death anxiety, people cling to their cultural worldviews and live up to the standards of value that are part of them. In doing so, people’s goal is to achieve
(a) literal immortality by believing that they will continue to exist after death (religious aspects of cultural worldviews) or
(b) symbolic immortality by becoming part of something greater than themselves which continues to exist after their own death (e.g. species, countries, families, ideas).

Unfortunately, once people invest their deepest existential concerns into a world view, the presence of other world view constructs may be experienced as a threat. People tend to become self-serving, less tolerant, more conservative, nationalistic and display more ingroup bias.

A large body of research has shown that reminders of death (mortality salience, MS) increase one’s need for defending and protecting one’s own worldview. More recent findings of cultural differences in some aspects of responses to death-related thoughts have shown that different ways of construing death have different consequences.

There are three known groups of people that do not display the commonly found TMT-effects on world view defence: 

(i) older adults, because death is inherent in their everyday life [2]
(ii) religious people (existential believers), because mortality is on average more salient for them
(iii) people on an existential quest who have not yet decided on a certain world-view, but remain open to and intend on finding one

This research project takes up these findings and aims to expand these three groups by one more: people who are constantly reminded of their own mortality in their everyday working life. The consideration behind this is that - similar to older adults - also people who are constantly reminded of death (e.g. undertakers and cemetery gardeners) may not show the typical MS-effects described by TMT, because death is saliently present in their lives.

The research design consists of two conditions: (a) participants reminded of death and (b) participants confronted with something else (i.e. pain). A questionnaire will be done by 40 people who are confronted with death in their profession frequently and it is also done by a control group consisting of 40 people.

Those people who are constantly reminded of their mortality through their work environment are expected to show less MS-effects compared to the control group. This outcome would have significant consequences in broadening the scope of TMT. It could show that those people who deal with death in their everyday working life transcend the anxiety-buffering system of their culture and develop a different way of dealing with the problem of death.

[1] T. Pyszczynski, S. Solomon, and J. Greenberg. "Thirty Years of Terror Management Theory: From Genesis to Revelation." Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, vol. 52, pp. 1-70, 2015

[2] B. V. Fortner, R. A. Neimeyer. "Death Anxiety in Older Adults: A Quantitative Review." Death Studies, vol. 23(5), pp. 387-411, 1999

