... title: Influence of Manipulation of Processing Fluency and Complexity on Liking in Aesthetic Experience



Abstract

The mechanisms and the purpose of aesthetic experience have baffled artists, philosophers, and psychologists since ancient times. In this work, the focus is on complexity and fluency of aesthetic experience. Research problem deals with Berlyne's arousal theory in connection to visual perception of abstract patterns, complexity, and fluency. Degrees of complexity and fluency are manipulated by adjusting the number of triangle elements in the stimuli, and exposure time, respectively. The hypothesis postulates that liking ratings awarded by participants descend as fluency increases with complexity kept at low levels. 

The processing fluency theory states that the ease with which an object is processed, is accompanied by a subjective feeling of fluency, which serves as a basis for several kinds of judgements and evaluations [1]. In previous, typical, experiments on processing fluency, the presentation of stimuli was manipulated in order to lessen or increase the ease of processing, i.e. processing fluency. Variations in presentation duration [1] are commonly used.

The stimuli used were taken from a previous experiment [2] and modified in order to manipulate complexity and fluency by controlling the number of triangle elements comprising the stimuli and presentation duration, respectively. The experiment required 30 participants. Prior to the experiment, the participants were tested in colour vision and visual acuity using standardised tests. The measures of liking ratings were taken using a five-point Likert scale, ranging from least liked to most liked.

Repeated measures design was used. To avoid stimulus repetition, which could result in mere exposure effects, every pattern was presented only once to each participant. Presentation durations were 100 ms, 300 ms, and 500 ms. This variation was based on previous studies showing reliable fluency effects in this time range [2]. Each trial started with a fixation cross (approx. 2000 ms), followed by a stimulus and a white noise mask (approx. 400 – 600 ms). After the mask, the participants provided their responses. Across participants, presentation durations for each complexity group were systematically permuted.

The obtained data were statistically analysed and assessed in terms of accuracy. Analysis of the results shows that with increasing presentation duration from 100 ms to 300 ms, the liking ratings decreased by 11.12%. On the other hand, with increased presentation duration to 500 ms, the liking ratings increased by 3.36%. Therefore, the results agree only partly with my hypothesis.

## References
[1]M. Forster, H. Leder and U. Ansorge, "It felt fluent, and I liked it: Subjective feeling of fluency rather than objective fluency determines liking.", Emotion, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 280-289, 2013.
[2]Gerger, G., Forster, M., & Leder, H. "It felt fluent but I did not like it - Fluency effects in faces versus patterns.", Quart. J. of Experimental Psychology, vol. 218, pp. 1–34, May. 2016.

