... title: Morphologically defined phonotactic sequences in English: Recognition in native and non-native speakers



Abstract

Many linguists have sought to determine the exact nature of the rules regarding affix ordering in the structure of a word, but there remains little consensus on their definition. Nevertheless, these rules tend to be strictly followed by all speakers of a language, even without having learned them explicitly, and certainly without the metalinguistic knowledge of why the rules are thus [1, 2].
A majority of theories of morphology assert that affixes have little to no significance in the mental lexicon—except with regard to the lexical bases with which they are associated—dismissing any inherently-used rules as merely word-specific associations. However, recent psycholinguistic research suggests that affixes are in fact recognizable and accessible in isolation, with no connection to a lexical base or other semantic context. This article presents one in a recent series of studies that looks at this phenomenon in native speakers of particular languages. In this study, participants are given a list of suffix combinations presented in isolation (i.e. without a lexical base), some of which exist in the language and some of which do not. They are then asked to identify which of the combinations exist and do not exist in their language. 
The test languages of these studies thus far include Polish, Italian, and Slovene, with similar results in each iteration showing that overall the participants recognize the existing suffix combinations without the help of semantic context or metalinguistic knowledge. As of yet, however, English is not among the languages that have been tested. The primary goal of this study is therefore to examine this phenomenon using English as the test language. Though the results are currently being analyzed, it is expected that native speakers of English will show similar abilities in this domain, joining the evidence from the other studies in suggesting that not only words but also standalone derivational morphemes—as well as structures between morphemes and words, such as these suffix combinations—exist in the mental lexicon regardless of the morphological nature of the language. 
Moreover, the widespread international use of English presents an ideal opportunity to test this ability in non-native speakers of a language, which has yet to be considered in this series of studies. Thus, this study also uses the same method to examine this phenomenon in non-native English speakers at various levels of fluency. This additional element provides insight into the nature of affixation in the mental lexicon of non-native speakers of a language, and could be a helpful step toward determining if, when, and to what extent this inherent sense of morphological rules takes hold within an individual’s linguistic development.

[1] I. Plag and H. Baayen, “Suffix Ordering and Morphological Processing,” _Language_, vol. 85, no. 1, pp. 109–152, 2009.
[2] S. Manova and M. Aronoff, “Modeling affix order,” _Morphology_, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 109–131, 2010.

