... title: Motor resonance based on desynchronization of the EEG mu rhythm



Abstract

Understanding motor actions of other human beings and even some animal species 
is one of the crucial cognitive skills that our brains possess. When we observe
another individual’s actions, which are represented and understood in terms of 
one’s own actions, it is possible to make predictions about the mental state of 
the observed individual, leading to "theory of mind" capabilities [1].

This understanding is often explained by activity of mirror neuron system and 
motor resonance in our brains, which can be experimentally proved through 
measurements and observations of EEG rhythm called mu rhythm. The mu rhythm is 
an EEG oscillation that can be recorded over human sensorimotor cortex in the 
absence of movement [1] physical and mental, too. Mu rhythms: (a) are more than 
an idling state of sensorimotor cortex and instead reflect dynamic and 
integrative sensory, motor, and mnemonic processes; (b) reflect activity in 
sensori-, audio-, and visuomotor mirror neurons in frontal and parietal 
networks; and (c) represent an important information processing function, which 
is to link perception and action, or more specifically the transformation of 
"seeing" and "hearing" into "doing" [1].

According to this knowledge we have focused on mu rhythm as indicator of motor 
resonance. The main purpose of this project was to prove the theory mentioned in 
previous paragraph. We created simple EEG experiments that should demonstrate 
previous findings. The experiment typically included these conditions: relaxed 
state with closed eyes, imaginary motor movement (index finger) with closed 
eyes, imaginary motor movement with opened eyes, observed motor movement (index 
finger), self motor movement (index finger) and relaxed state with opened eyes. 

In all EEG measurements International 10-20 system of electrode placement was 
used. We recorded signals from nine passive electrodes in areas: F3, F4, Fz, C3, 
C4, Cz, P3, P4, Pz. Ground electrode was placed in Fpz area and reference 
electrode on left mastoid bone. Data evaluation was implemented in MatLab and 
based on Fourier transformations. Analysis was made for each electrode 
separately, mapping all experimental conditions. 

We expected the highest mu strength within relaxed states and apparent suppression 
within imaginary and self motor movement conditions. Several preliminary 
measurements on sample of two left-handed and one right-handed participants were 
made. The analysis of measured data matched our expectations in all conditions 
except imaginary movement condition. In that condition we observed very little or
almost none desynchronization and suppression. We should increase the number of 
participants and eliminate disturbing elements in future experiments.

References:

[1] J. A. Pineda, The functional significance of mu rhythms: translating 
"seeing" and "hearing" into "doing", Brain Research Reviews, 2005.

