... title: Content-based image retrieval using Hierarchical Temporal Memory



Abstract

Increasing amount of digitally produced images in various domains such as journalism, medicine, or private life induce a great need for a more appropriate approaches to accessing the pictorial data. Content-based image retrieval (CBIR) means an effective representation of images in a database that allows sorting (ranking) of images with respect to the content similarity with the query image. In the past, several CBIR systems have been proposed that shared a common principle of representing the image by means of numeric features (descriptors). These features have been designed to capture specific image properties that should allow meaningful image representation and retrieval. The most common features included color histograms, moment-based shape features, texture descriptors, appearance features, 2D shape features, etc. [3]. 
Let's assume that every image can be represented as a point in a multidimensional metric space where each dimension corresponds to one of the descriptive features. Such images could then be retrieved in a nearest-neighbor manner where the convexity of the content clusters would be of a great help. Unfortunately the spaces generated by elementary image features (e.g., pixels) are typically non-convex, since members of different classes may occur on the line between two members of the same class. Therefore one must think of a transformation between the non-convex image space and the appropriate convex feature space suitable for CBIR.
Hierarchical Temporal Memory (HTM) is a large-scale model of the neocortex derived from the biological theory called Memory-Prediction framework [1]. This theory claims that the neocortex uses a memory of sequences in a hierarchy to model and infer causes in the outer world. The HTM network consists of a number of elementary nodes that implement the same learning and inference algorithms. The nodes are organized in a tree-shaped hierarchy where the lower-level nodes have only small receptive fields and those at higher levels integrate larger spans of the input space. During learning phase each node performs unsupervised grouping of the spatial patterns according to their temporal proximity in the training sequence. This phase results in a set of the temporal groups that unify patterns having tendency to co-occur close by in time and so likely sharing the same cause. After the learning process is finished, the node can calculate beliefs in the learned temporal groups for any given input pattern. During learning of the higher-level nodes, the vectors of beliefs in lower-level temporal groups serve as inputs for the higher-level nodes being learned. The beliefs emerging at the top-most level of the HTM hierarchy exhibit some interesting properties, such as that they remain stable for patterns that share the same cause in the outer world, while keeping a sufficient discriminative power (specificity) for differentiating between different classes [2]. These properties suggest that HTM can be viewed as a system for automatic discovery of the features appropriate for building a CBIR system.
In this paper, the HTM network is used to transform space of elementary image features (i.e., responses to a bank of Gabor filters) to the space of beliefs in the highest-level temporal groups. This space is expected to provide high-level invariances, satisfy partially or completely the convexity condition and so have close relation to Gardenfors' conceptual spaces without explicit knowledge about semantics of the space dimensions. Our goal is to explore and compare properties of the space of elementary image features and the space of beliefs in the HTM temporal groups as you go higher throughout the network's hierarchy. The ultimate goal of this research is to build a successful CBIR system in a domain of natural scenes based on the HTM model.

References:
[1]	Hawkins, J.; Blakeslee, S. (2004) On Intelligence
[2]	George, D. (2008) How the Brain Might Work: A Hierarchical and Temporal Model for Learning and Recognition
[3]	Deselaers, T.; Keysers, D.; Ney, H. (2007) Features for Image Retrieval: An Experimental Comparison

