... title: Neural Correlates of Visuospatial Working Memory: An fMRI Study



Abstract

Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), we attempted to locate neural correlates of visuospatial working memory. Working memory is a cognitive process that enables people to maintain a certain amount of information. We are interested in finding out where visual and spatial information is stored and if a different system is involved when maintaining a combination of the two.

We relied on a number of assumptions. The first is based on an article by Vogel and Machizawa [1]. They used electroencephalography (EEG) to test the capacity of visuospatial working memory, which is said to be between 3 and 4 objects. They found that what correlates with this capacity in the brain is the so called CDA – contralateral delay activity, which is crucial to further research on the topic of working memory. Another assumption is based on the idea of functional localization. Sala and Courtney [2] used fMRI to detect different areas of the prefrontal cortex, responsible for processing different aspects of visual working memory. Our prefrontal cortex tends to be domain-general when we are required to memorize a unified stimulus, for example an object in a location, and domain-specific if the task demands either the identity of an object or its location. 

This study was the last in a series of three, testing where and how working memory is stored. 34 participants (mean age = 20.3, 82.4% female) were asked to perform a task while in the fMRI machine, where they had to maintain a series of visuospatial stimuli in their working memory. The stimulus was a colored square on a 5 by 5 grid. They either had to remember their location (anywhere on the grid), their identity (one of 25 different shades of color), or a combination thereof. These tasks came in two levels of difficulty; either the subjects had to memorize two unique stimuli, each repeated twice, or four, where each stimulus only occurred once. 

We expect to find similar results to the previous studies. Specifically, this means finding that working memory capacity for visual information is found in a cognitive system independent from where spatial information is found, but when maintaining integrated information, both systems are active, though to a lesser extent. The brain areas that we expect to represent working memory are the frontal and parietal regions.

!!References
[1] E. K. Vogel and M. G. Machizawa, “Neural activity predicts individual differences in visual working memory capacity,” Nature, vol. 428, no. 6984, pp. 748-51, Apr. 2004.
[2] J. B. Sala and S. M. Courtney, “Binding of what and where during working memory maintenance,” Cortex, vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 5-21, Jan. 2007.

