... title: Illusion of Control and Persistence



Abstract

The illusion of control is the false belief of having an influence on the outcome of events that depend purely on chance [1] and has been reported in various everyday situations (e.g. professional trading and risk perception in driving). While perceived control over one’s own outcomes, even if illusory, can be beneficial in some cases, it may also be costly and disadvantageous in other contexts. For example, believing one is in control may bias decisions to persist in competitions despite growing and impending losses. While previous studies provide some correlational evidence to support this link [2, 3], no studies have yet experimentally manipulated illusion of control to determine its causal effects on costly persistence in disadvantageous competitions.
To induce an illusion of control, we use a rigged computer game in which participants have to illuminate a lightbulb by choosing between two different key presses across multiple trials. Every 20 trials, participants judge their control over successfully illuminating the lightbulb. Unbeknownst to the participants, the frequency of successful illumination is manipulated to be high for participants in the high illusion group and low for participants in the low illusion group irrespective of individual key choices. The induction phase is followed by a competitive phase in which participants play the same game but with an additional opponent, actually a computer programme. Each trial costs a small fee. Moreover, participants have the possibility of betting on the outcome of each trial. Any expenses are subtracted from an endowment received at the beginning of the competition. To simulate a growing and impending loss, we rigged the competition such that the probability of winning equals that of losing in the first trial, but decreases slowly across each subsequent trial. Importantly, participants can quit the competition at any time, keeping any remaining money from their initial endowment.
Based on the hypothesis that the illusion of control may bias decisions to persist in competitions despite increasing losses, we predict that participants who are manipulated to feel more in control of the lightbulb will persist longer on the task and will bet more money than participants who are manipulated to feel less in control. The predicted differences between subjects will be investigated by comparing self-reported (e.g. believed level of control over the lightbulb) and behavioural measures (e.g. persistence and betting behaviour) obtained throughout the induction and competitive phase. These are complemented by demographic information and psychometric data on perseverance-related personality traits and a post-task feedback questionnaire checking for suspicion towards the task design. A confirmation of our prediction would corroborate the idea that the illusion of control potentially functions as a motivator, even in disadvantageous competitive situations that are costly to the individual.
!!References
[1] E. J. Langer, “The illusion of control,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 311–328, 1975.
[2] T. A. Langens, “Emotional and motivational reactions to failure: The role of illusions of control and explicitness of feedback,” Motivation and Emotion, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 105–114, 2007.
[3] J. Billieux, M. van der Linden, Y. Khazaal, D. Zullino, & L. Clark, “Trait gambling cognitions predict near-miss experiences and persistence in laboratory slot machine gambling,” British journal of psychology, vol. 103, no. 3, pp. 412-427, 2012.

