... title: Computerized Mental Rotation Test with Dynamic Rotating Stimuli



Abstract

Ability to mentally rotate objects is an essential skill that we use in everyday life, whether we are navigating across town, arranging furniture or parking a car. Moreover concept of mental rotations is crucial in many fields (for example aviation) and therefore has been an interest of many researchers that try to find ways to improve it [1], and to this day many variations of mental rotation tests have been designed. It was first introduced by Shepard and Metzler [2] and their well-known experiment in which they presented participants with pairs of 3-D differently rotated objects, and asked them if they are the same or mirror images of each other. Their research showed that reaction time in which participants have to decide if objects are the same is linearly increasing with an angle of rotation, indicating the existence of an internal “mental rotation” process. With the rapid advancement in technology, computerization of paper tests is increasing, and therefore we have decided to create a computerized version of mental rotation test. In addition we decided to improve it by adding dynamic rotating stimuli condition, since such stimuli may influence the mental rotation process differently [3]. Our test consists of rotating and static conditions that randomly alternate throughout the test, and in the end participant’s results are recorded. In each trial pairs of 3-D objects (as in [2]) are presented and the participant has to decide if objects are similar as quickly and as accurately as possible. Underlying mechanisms of mental rotations are still the subject of research. However after experiments participants often report that they rotate the end of one object until it matches the other one, and then after this “mental rotation” decide whether objects are different or identical [2]. Therefore we expect that performance in rotating condition will be worse since such comparison will be more difficult to accomplish with dynamic stimuli. We will collect some data from our new test to explore whether dynamic rotating stimuli have any influence on performance compared to static stimuli. Our main goal is to develop a computerized new version of mental rotation test, which can be easily and quickly configured to create different variations of the test, and possibly be used in further research on the topic.
[1] J. K. Krüger and B. Suchan, "You Should Be the Specialist! Weak Mental Rotation Performance in Aviation Security Screeners – Reduced Performance Level in Aviation Security with No Gender Effect," Frontiers in Psychology, vol. 7, 2016.
[2] R. N. Shepard and J. Metzler, "Mental Rotation of Three-Dimensional Objects," Science, vol. 171, no. 3972, pp. 701–703, 1971. 
[3] G. E. Larson, "Mental rotation of static and dynamic figures," Perception and Psychophysics, vol. 58, pp. 153-159, 1996.

