... title: Education and Romani Children: Developing an Interdisciplinary Perspective



Abstract

In my talk I will, through an interdisciplinary perspective, undertake an explanation of the query of Romani children and education in Eastern Europe and introduce my solution to the overrepresentation of these children in special education.
!!The situation 
Roma children are disproportionately present in special schools/classes in Serbia, especially in those for children with intellectual disabilities [1]. Children are streamed based on the inadequate adaptation of instruments for screening for diagnostic purposes. These standardized measures also assume a child's exposure to certain cultural experiences. The disability label they get attached is permanent and has many negative influences on child’s present and future life by affecting their later participation in the labor market and feeding the vicious poverty cycle. I believe that this covert discrimination and segregation that still continues at the educational level is a paradox of our times that needs to be explored. 
!!Tackling the problem 
My perspective proposes that a big part of the problem lies on the side of culturally insensitive educational theories implemented in the schooling system. Even though many sociological studies have confirmed that primary education does benefit children from disadvantaged backgrounds, little has been done to address the question of the suitable method that should implemented in classroom practice. I hypothesize that the constructivist approach in preschool could be an effective method, since it takes into account the previous background and experiences of the learner. From a radical constructivist perspective, no viewpoint is more accurate than another because ontological reality is not accessible to rational human knowledge [2], which implies that no culture is superior to others. Constructivist educational principles encourage critical thinking as well as motivated and independent learning. My research question is whether constructivist teaching models, implemented in early education, could be adapted for children from disadvantaged backgrounds and marginalized groups such as Roma.
!!Possible implications
An early education approach based on constructivist educational philosophy could benefit the children's transition to primary school with the conservation of cultural and individual differences. Educational methods which would take into account minority students’ different life experiences and learning environments could also compensate for the experiences they are expected to have, but mostly lack, when entering primary school.
!!References:
[1] J. White, “Pitfalls and Bias: Entry testing and the overrepresentation of Romani children in special education.” Roma Education Fund, Budapest, Hungary, rep., 2012.
[2] E. von Glasersfeld, Radical constructivism: a way of knowing and learning. London: Falmer Press, 1995

