... title: Using Clustering to Determine the Basic Structure of Natural Language



Abstract

The identification of principal characteristics of language and the formation of grammatical concepts has a long linguistic tradition. Old Greeks were the first Europeans to study a language systematically and classify words into categories [1].Throughout history the practice of classifying words for the purpose of grammatical description has been constantly changing due to diverse linguistic traditions and unique characteristics of individual languages. However, Greco-Roman tradition nowadays still forms the foundation for determining and describing word classes in most languages [2], even if such classification is often problematic. In this way the types of word classes and the classification of words are under the influence of historically established linguistic concepts and are not grounded solely in the structure and organization of natural language. The aim of this project is to disregard the established grammatical concepts and describe the principal characteristics of natural language on the basis of syntactic, morphological and semantic similarity of words in a text corpus. Slovene corpora will be used as a basis for the analysis. In order to determine the principal characteristics of language by focusing exclusively on natural language similarity with no additional linguistic knowledge provided, unsupervised machine learning will be used. Different methods of clustering such as agglomerative hierarchical clustering, K-means partitioning clustering, DBSCAN density clustering, etc. will be applied to classify words into clusters on the basis of their similarity. The aim of clustering is to group objects in such a way that there is maximal similarity within groups, but minimal similarity between groups [3]. Distributional or syntactic, metaphorical and semantic features of individual words appearing in corpora will be used as similarity measures. The calculated distance between words will serve as the input into the clustering process. Several combinations of different criteria will be tested. Python programming language together with several useful libraries (NLTK, scikit-learn and Orange) will be employed to determine similarity measures and implement clustering. The resultant word clusters will be compared to traditional word categorizations and serve as the basis for the interpretation of the principal characteristics of language. During the process of clustering it will also be established which aspects of similarity are most informative and which clustering methods most appropriate to determine the basic structure of natural language. 

!!References
[1] V. Law, The History of Linguistics in Europe from Plato to 1600. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003. 
[2] M. Haspelmath, “Word Classes and Parts of Speech,” in International Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences, N. J. Smelser and P. B. Baltes, Eds. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2001.
[3] J. Han and M. Kamber, Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2006.

