... title: The effects of different kinds of imagined movements on the accuracy of a BCI system



Abstract

The subject that will be briefly discussed in this paper are the brain-computer interfaces (BCI) and the aspects of a research related to this topic. BCIs can be seen as an artificially established way of interaction with the environment using our brain, mediated by a machine. By a machine, we mean virtually anything ranging from now widespread mobile “smart” phones, to personal computers, electric wheelchairs or even cars. Such technology, when perfected, would be beneficial in assisting or treating people with impaired cognitive or motor functions, but also in various everyday situations. As such, BCIs are now a widely spread and challenging research area for many scientific institutes and universities worldwide. 

For the Department of Applied Informatics at the Faculty of Mathematics, Physics and Informatics at the Comenius University in Bratislava, BCIs are a rather new research effort which is yet to be fully explored. Present research is oriented primarily on BCI operated by human sensorimotor rhythm (SMR), also called the mu rhythm [1], which is a brain wave that desynchronizes during both actual and imagined motor actions. The brain readings are taken using an electroencephalograph (EEG), which is easily one of the most used and studied devices in BCI research due to its non-invasiveness (meaning the readings are taken only from the scalp with no surgical procedure needed) and ease of use. The goal is creating a reliable interface capable of two-dimensional control of cursor in a personal computer using BCI2000 [2] software, while gathering valuable information and preparing the ground for future projects dedicated to more complex and robust systems.

In mu rhythm experiments, subjects are asked to react to a presented stimulus or to control a cursor by imagining a movement of one or both their hands or feet. The movement is usually desired to be a kind of a grasping movement, e.g. squeezing a small ball in the respective hand. What is not clear is whether the character of the imagined movement in fact affects the ability of the BCI system to correctly recognise the imagined movement and carry out appropriate action. This paper tries to shed more light into this question. In a series of stimulus presentation mu rhythm experiments, we asked our subjects to imagine different kinds of movements for each set of trials. There were three kinds of movements used in our experiments: the aforementioned ball grasping, simple waving and punching (or kicking if leg movements were desired). Each session started with a set of practice trials to familiarize subjects with the experiment. After testing all three kinds of movements, subjects were also asked to devise their own imagined movement and test it on an additional set of trials. This was a voluntary task which purpose was to potentially find a new effective movement. The experimental data was then statistically evaluated and the results processed into graphs showing the effectivity for each imagined movement.


[1] Pineda, J. "The Functional Significance of Mu Rhythms: Translating “seeing” and “hearing” into “doing”." Brain Research Reviews 50.1 (2005): 57-68.
[2] Schalk, G., D.J. McFarland, T. Hinterberger, N. Birbaumer, and J.R. Wolpaw. "BCI2000: A General-Purpose Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) System." IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 51.6 (2004): 1034-043.

