... title: Teams in isolated confined environments



Abstract

Historically, when the first European ships embarked on long voyages over the sea, the main interest was in what islands and cultures they encountered. Most contemporary and even today's accounts of these travels tell us about their discoveries or the technologies that enabled them to go to these places. Likewise, when today astronauts go to the Earth orbit or to the Moon we hear mostly about what space or the Moon are like or what marvelous technology they use to get there. However, the technological possibility to travel these huge distances puts these travelers in very unusual situations: they live in a very small space on board of a (space) ship with the same people for several weeks or even months and years. Similarly, researchers in Antarctica stay within a small research station all winter due to very bad outside conditions.  Fortunately, humans are able to cope with very different and hostile environments thanks to their technology. Most people are able to accept very harsh conditions for a short time. However, the longer one has to endure them, the more difficult it becomes. This work is inspired by the question of how future astronauts will cope with a voyage to Mars. From today's point of view, this voyage would most probably be over three years long - half of this time would be spent in space and the other half on the surface of Mars. Although this journey is surely difficult from the point of technology needed to get humans safely to Mars and back again, it is even more demanding from the psychological point of view. 

This work is intended to investigate some of the psychological processes involved in such a scenario (c.f. for a recent review [1]). In particular, the psychological adaptation to isolated and confined environments (ICEs) is of interest. The main goal of this work is to study what influences this adaptation process - be it in a positive or negative way - and to what degree it is possible to influence it by design of the mission and its different aspects, for example the space craft itself or the work flow. A special focus is put on the productivity of the overall team and whether the adaptation to the extreme conditions may change the performance. For this work, a theoretical approach is chosen. In particular, existing literature is reviewed and, if possible, suggestions for further experiments are proposed. The reviewed literature is reinterpreted using the motivational background described below. 

The main motivations for studying this special scenario are threefold. Nowadays, every space flight is planned as a mission which has a clearly defined (set of) goal(s). The overall crew performance may, thus, be measured - at least qualitatively - by the number of achieved goals. The idea that a group of people, or agents, may be understood as a single cognitive system was probably most prominently proposed by Hutchins in his study of a pilot crew during a landing procedure [2]. Similarly, a performance criterion can be defined for the pilot crew, e.g. how well the crew landed. This possibility to define such performance criteria for cooperating group of people with a common set of goals - i.e. teams - may be linked to the research of artificial intelligence (AI). In AI research, one of the most important tools for comparing different agents or agent architectures is a performance function. In the case of a (space) crew, a definition of a performance function for a single crew member may be possible but is usually not well suited - most mission goals are defined at the level of the whole mission (e.g. return some geological samples from Mars). So, one motivation behind this work is to investigate the theoretical implications of using a whole-crew performance criterion. In particular, it is of interest whether any different methodological approaches are entailed by considering the whole crew as a single cognitive system. For example, the communication within the crew might be seen as a process of information flow between different parts of the cognitive system instead of information flow between different agents. It is possible that this change in perspective might lead to a different communication style and/or technology. 
The second motivation behind this work is less specific to the scenario of a voyage to Mars. Instead, it is related to the question of what abnormal or unusual environments can tell us about normal human behavior. In general, there are two ways in which these environments and the related human behavior may be abnormal. The first is the physical environment: weightlessness, extreme climate or natural disasters like floods will need different behavioral responses from those to usual environments. This may give insight to the range of human behavior. The second source of insight may be the strength of the response which could never be reproduced under experimental conditions, for example courage, endurance or self-sacrifice. Further, it may show what coping strategies different people use and whether these are correlated with other personal characteristics such as personality traits. In the context of a voyage to Mars, this information may be used to select the best suited people for the planned tasks. Under prolonged isolation, small conflicts with other members of the crew or outside people (e.g. the ground control personnel in Houston) may become a danger to the success of the mission. The way a crew might behave on such a voyage to Mars is mostly different in degree to the behavior in their everyday setting. But especially the possibility of conflict within the group and with other groups entails a huge risk of safety and mission success. So, to potentially enable such a voyage it is necessary to study the relationship of behavior in everyday environments and in more extreme situations. 
The third motivation is a methodological: isolated and confined environments may be seen as "natural laboratories". In general, the main goal of a laboratory experiment is its high reproducibility and control over many, possibly outcome-influencing variables. ICEs, such as space stations or research stations in Antarctica are characterized by a high level of control by the designers of the ICEs. This control usually goes as far as which places may be used for which activity, which food is available or how work flow is organized into work shifts. In principle, it may be possible to adapt the physical environment to the needs of an experimental paradigm. More importantly, despite the fact that these environments are unfamiliar they are still natural environments in the sense that the crews are working and living there. In normal laboratories, the participants just participate in the experiment. The laboratory is unrelated to their everyday environment. In the case of natural laboratories, the validity of the results is ensured by the fact that the experiment takes place within the everyday environment. 


References:

[1]Kanas, N. et al. (2009) Psychology and culture during long-duration space missions.
[2]Hutchins, E. (1995) How a cockpit remembers its speed.

