... title: Impact of play and positive emotions on divergent thinking



Abstract

Play has been identified in literature as a potential indicator of the current welfare and therefore linked to the experience of positive emotions in animals and in humans. Panksepp [1] suggests that “the main adaptive function of play may be the generation of positive emotional states. In such states animals may be more willing and more likely to behave in flexible and creative ways”. This presumption is in line with the broaden-and-build theory created by Barbara Fredrickson [2]. According to this theory, negative emotions function in a manner that they call to mind an urge to act in a particular way. On the other hand, positive emotions widen the array of the thoughts and actions that come to person's mind, or they “broaden peoples’ momentary thought–action repertoires” [2]. Also, work of A. Isen and colleagues shows that positive affect leads to greater creativity, improved negotiation processes, more thorough, open-minded, flexible thinking and problem solving. Guilford (as cited in [3]) posited that the ability to envision multiple solutions to a problem, called divergent thinking, lay at the core of creativity. The opposite of it is convergent thinking, the tendency to narrow all options to a single solution. 
The aim of this research was to explore if play can generate positive emotions and by that induce divergent thinking. This research was conducted individually in a standardized testing condition on 33 five and six-year olds (20 boys and 13 girls). Subjects were randomly divided to experimental (N=18) or control (N=15) testing condition.  In the experimental condition the experimenter played a short game with the subjects in which the experimenter would name different objects or animals and the child had to tell, as soon as possible, if the named object or animal can fly. After the game, children’s emotions were measured with a short questionnaire made especially for this purpose.  After reporting their emotional state, divergent thinking was measured with the test created for this research using Torrance’s “Thinking Creatively in Action and Movement Test” as a template. The control condition was the same as experimental, except the experimenter did not play the game with the children. 
It was assumed that the children who played the game would exhibit more positive emotions and less negative one, and therefore more creative behaviour than the children in the control condition. This hypothesis was only partly confirmed. Because of a small sample size the variables were not distributed normally, so the differences between groups were tested using non-parametric Mann Whitney U test. Although the means of all variables showed differences between testing conditions in the expected directions, most of these differences were not significant. The only significant differences were in: sadness (p=0.001), one of the three possible tasks that measured imagination (p=0.011), one of the two tasks that measured originality of responses (p=0.04) and the negative emotions in general (p=0.004). This means that the experimental group, which played the game, showed less negative emotions, especially sadness, and more imagination and originality in their responses.

[1] Panksepp, J. (1993) Rough-and-tumble play: A fundamental brain process. 
[2] Fredrickson, B. (2005). Positive emotions.
[3] Torrance, E.P. (1988). The nature of creativity as manifest in its testing.

