... title: SEARCHING FOR A STRATEGY OF MONOPOLY GAME USING COGNITIVE AND ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE APPROACH



Abstract

The purpose of this work is to find and describe a strategy in Monopoly game. The Monopoly game is one of the most popular board games and it is played across the whole world. In Monopoly game it is noticeable how people make decisions, how they create their own strategy, how this strategy is changing and how they can win the game. Especially the last point is very interesting, because there are no strategies about which we can say they are the best. Many researchers specialise in mathematical and statistical models of Monopoly strategy. They generally simulate Monopoly game on computer simulations and from that they make certain conclusions. Then there are a few studies focusing on behavioural aspects of players, which observe participants during playing Monopoly game or other similar board games. My intention was to join these two approaches together. In this work I observed players, their decisions in certain situations, their strategy during the whole game, their reactions, etc. I used different ways of observation methods: silent observation, participant observation and questionnaire observation method. I made an analysis of collected information and then I created a model of tactics. It means what players should and what should not do in certain situations of a game. Then I did investigation of literature, I used many resources, from board game studies over statistical and probabilistic models to economist studies. I offered an overview of possible strategies, which along with results from my observation, identify complex outlook of strategies in Monopoly game. According to this I have created a certain model of a global strategy which was a starting point for creating an artificial agent-player. I have implemented this model of a global strategy in combination with a model of tactics into the rule-based agent-player. In order to enable the agent-players to compete against each other I created a simulator of this game. It was possible to improve the rule-based agent-player and therefore I applied two optimisations to the found strategy. 

I used an approach of genetic algorithms inspired by a natural evolution in order to find certain parameters, which I could only estimate to be in the found model of a strategy because the observations of participants and study of literatures did not offer me a complete knowledge of some important decision-making situations. The approach of genetic algorithms allowed me to find values for these parameters by evolving them. According to Whitley [1] genetic algorithms belong to a group of evolutionary algorithms inspired by nature. They imitate evolutionary processes, which are known from biology. 

The reason for the second optimisation was to specify the decisions of purchasing the assets from global perspective with respect to the whole state space of a game. It was done by the reinforcement learning approach in combination with neural network. The neural network allows a generalisation, it means to know how to decide in situations, which did not occur in the training process. According to Sutton & Barto [2] the reinforcement learning (1) brings a concept of reward and punishment, which in analogy with a human represents pleasure and pain. (2) It also brings a concept of judgement, which says how good or bad is a particular state from the perspective of a long-term evaluation of the environment. The using of artificial neural network has its origin in the activity of biological cerebral and neural structures and simulates a learning ability of understanding unknown processes.

All of this was ended with a competition of these strategies and finding a winner agent-player whose strategy was the best.

During observations I found out a very interesting fact. After first observation I realised the problem with original rules. The Monopoly game was created in 1933. Since that time millions of people all over the world have played it. And it is translated to many languages. The rules of original game have never changed. Everybody can read these rules in handbook which is the part of Monopoly game. However only few people play this game according to the original rules [3]. Is it not weird?	Why is it like that? My work was going also through such questions.

[1] Whitley, D. (1994). A genetic algorithm tutorial
[2] Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (1998). Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction
[3] Albertarelli , S. (2000). 1000s Ways to Play Monopoly

