... title: Communicating Emergent Novelty – Proposing a Theoretical Communicative Framework to Support Novelty Creation in Organizations



Abstract

In order to be successful in this complex, dynamic market, organizations have to focus on innovation approaches that are oriented towards shaping a rapidly changing environment by creating novelty [1]. For this, they must be able to (1) identify and (2) cultivate - as [3] put it -“emerging opportunities before they become manifest in the marketplace” and to successfully (3) diffuse them.

There is consensus that communication plays and important role in innovation processes [2]. However, the focus currently seems to be on the distribution of innovations after their creation [2], leaving out the key role communication plays before and during the innovation process. Its facilitating role is underestimated, probably resulting of a failure to understand that novelty creation is a dynamic, social, emergent process that cannot be managed, but only enabled [1]. Hence, communication strategies that focus on enabling novelty creation are currently missing [2].

The aim of this work is to provide a theoretical communication framework for the enabling approach to innovation. It is inspired by two important theories in the field of innovation: C.O. Scharmer’s Theory U provides a pointer on how to deal with change and uncertainty in organizations [3]. M.F. Peschl’s Emergent Innovation process [1] is destined at creating game-changing innovations that at the same time fit into the existing environment.

The aim of this work is to highlight the enabling role of communication in processes of novelty creation in organizations and to develop a framework for communication strategies that can be employed by organizations. It is assumed this will successfully contribute to organizations’ innovation activities in three ways: first, by preparing and guiding innovators through the innovation process; second, by identifying and facilitating organizational changes; third, by strategically engaging (future) users and thereby shaping the future market - as it emerges. 

Results will be implemented in actual innovation communication strategies within organizations from different industries, providing a “reality check” for its applicability. However, this is not part of the master’s thesis. 

!! References

[1] M.F. Peschl and T. Fundneider, “Uncertainty and Opportunity as Drivers for Re-Thinking Management: Future-oriented organizations by Going Beyond a Mechanistic Culture in Organizations,” in ReThinking Management, 1st ed. Wiesbaden, Germany: Springer Fachmedien, 2017, pp. 79-96.
[2] N. Pfefferman, N., “Communication Model Design Innovation – Authentic Open Innovation-Culture,” in Strategy and Communication for Innovation, 3rd ed. Cham, Germany: Springer International Publishing, 2017, pp.113-130.
[3] C.O. Scharmer, “Self-transcending knowledge: sensing and organizing around emerging opportunities,” J. Of Knowledge Manage, vol. 5, no. 2, 2001, pp. 137-151.

