... title: Stratego



Abstract

Artificial intelligence (AI) players dominate most of the games. World best players of games like chess or Jeopardy has been defeated by computers, despite of these games seems to be unmanageable for computers, until IBM build Deep Blue or Watson. Of course computer will eventually beat humans in every game, but for now, there are still games in which dominates human players. One of them is Stratego.

Stratego has been evolved from traditional Chinese game Jungle or Game of the Fighting Animals. Game came to Europe during WWI, and it has been called L’attaque. Modern version of the game and also the name Stratego is known since 1960s. Stratego is board game for two players on a 10x10 square board. Each player controls 40 pieces with different ranks. Goal of the game is to capture opponent’s flag. Position of flag is unknown, because player set up pieces at its discretion at the beginning of the game. Game can look similar to chess, but major different (for AI) is, that player can’t see rank of opponents pieces until they face in combat. This make game unpredictably, so we can’t use traditional approaches like MiniMax algorithm. Firstly the branching factor would be multiple times larger as it is in chess. Secondly, we would have to count with every possible distribution of ranks, and this restriction made us choose actions that are preferably for us based on the ideal (possible) distribution of pieces, not the actual one.

In this project we focus on one specific problem: How to guess where is opponent’s flag in ending states of game. By ending state of game we mean state of game, when players have ten or less pieces, that doesn’t move yet. It’s easy task for skilled human player, just by quick look at the board, but it is almost impossible to define formal rules, which would specify the position of the flag. Therefore we use neural network that is trained in numbers of ending game states. Game states are represented as binary vectors. One represents piece on the square, zero represents empty square. Size of vector is 40 because flag can be only in first forty squares. If pieces move during game, it is represented as zero for the neural network, as flag is unmovable piece. Network has multi-layer binary perceptron architecture. Training and testing data are real-game records with known position of flag. This clearly means that neural network is able to guess position of flag, only if it’s predictable and don’t guess right when position of flag is random or absolutely illogical (bluffing), but the same applies for human players.

Neural network is “guessing” position of the flag more accurate, than any other formal algorithm ever should. As far as I know, best Stratego-playing AI are guessing position of flag only if they play with particular player before, not trying to generalize the problem. This NN will be part of complex Stratego-playing AI that will be implementing in the following year as my diploma thesis.

