... title: Case Study of a 5-Year Old Girl with Mild Developmental Delay – a Multidisciplinary Approach and the Perspective of Body Schema



Abstract

!!!! Case Study of a 5-Year Old Girl with Mild Developmental Delay – a Multidisciplinary Approach and the Perspective of Body Schema

!! Introduction

In this paper I present a 5-year old girl E. T. through different perspectives, which mainly derive from different fields of practice of specialists who examined her. In the second part I present the case through perspective of body schema. This is a postural model that keeps track of limb position and plays an important role in control of action. It involves aspects of both central (brain processes) and peripheral (sensory, proprioceptive) systems and it can be considered the collection of processes that registers the posture of one's body parts in space [1]. I hypothesize that sensory integration therapy improves girl’s body schema and thus facilitates her development the most.

!! Methods

I searched the child’s medical records – exams, diagnostic tests, and different specialists’ opinions and performed unstructured interviews with her parents. To understand her functioning better, the girl was filmed during medical examinations, spontaneous activity, and during sensory integration therapy. Written consent was obtained from child’s parents prior to the study.

!! Results Obtained from the Multidisciplinary Approach

The child seemed to have developed normally in first few months, but around seventh month growth and especially motor development slowed down. She was examined by pediatrician and diagnosed with developmental delay and stunted growth; year later she was treated by ophthalmologist and diagnosed with divergent strabismus. At four years pediatrician diagnosed her with social functioning disorder. Brain imaging was done at 15 months and showed wider lateral ventricles. Psychologist described E. T. as calm, quiet, and unmotivated for moving. She received neuro-physiotherapeutic treatment and occupational therapy and she still receives sensory integration therapy, logopedic treatment and special pedagogic support in kindergarten. Child’s mother reported she is herself stiff and ponderous regarding movement and her sister also received neuro-physiotherapeutic treatment.

!! New Perspective – Body Schema

Even though different perspectives from different experts give a lot of information about the child’s situation, I wanted to integrate them and reflect them through more holistic view. I conclude that E. T. doesn’t have adequate body schema. Since she doesn’t have a good sense of her body (parts), she isn’t as able to successfully perform motor actions as her peers; she also needs more time to choose the right movement strategy. I conclude that the sensory integration therapy facilitates E. T.’s development the most, because it challenges her to explore her body, the ever-changing environment and the interaction between the two – it gradually improves her body schema. Child’s mother indeed confirmed the biggest improvement in all the areas of development after this therapy.

!! Acknowledgments
We’d like to thank E. T. and her parents, who were willing to participate.

!! References
[1] N. Holmes and C. Spence. “The body schema and the multisensory representation(s) of peripersonal space.” Cognitive processing, vol. 5, pp. 94-105, Jun. 2004.

