... title: Hedonic Treadmill Theory Applied To Virtual Reality Technologies



Abstract

Rapid developments in information technologies can make us wonder what the future has in store for us. Ray Kurzweil predicts we will develop brain-computer interfaces that will allow us to experience full-immersion virtual environments, indistinguishable from real reality, by the late 2020s. [1] Because such a profound technology could have a huge impact on our society, such as global apathy and emotional absence to achieve new things, the goal of the project was to review literature of Hedonic Treadmill theory, while assuming that the technology actually won’t make a huge impact.
	In 1971, Brickman and Campbell coined the term Hedonic Treadmill, which explains sensory adaptation that seems to happen to people experiencing emotional reactions to significant life events. [2] People adapt to any positive or negative life event and return to the previous neutral emotional state, which suggest, that we have to continually set new goals and strive for new things to keep ourselves happy. What would happen if virtual reality would allow us to experience any desirable sensory experience at the snap of our fingers? Would this mean that we would have the feeling that we have achieved all of our goals and that this would lead us into a state of apathy? Would we continue to value any experience or material thing, if they would be instantly accessible in virtual worlds?
	But there is also another side to the story. Even though the Hedonic Treadmill theory states that life circumstances don’t have an effect on well-being of a person, newer research finds they do have at least a mild effect. People are mostly in a happy, not neutral state of being, they have different default levels of general happiness which depend on life circumstances, but also on their personality traits. It also varies throughout life, meaning the general level of happiness can be improved with the right interventions. [3] This adds importance to the ethical discussion about the regulation of virtual reality technologies and the best practices of dealing with such technologies to maximize our well-being and prevent possible negative effect.
	While the classic Hedonic Treadmill stated that full-immersion virtual reality won’t cause a wide societal impact to well-being, more recent findings and analyses suggest a different mechanism. Therefore, the effect of virtual reality on society should be studied carefully and regulated accordingly.
[1] R. Kurzweil, “The Impact,” in The Singularity Is Near, New York, Viking, 2005, ch. 6, pp 227 - 271.
[2] P. Brickman, D. T. Campbell, ''Hedonic relativism and planning the good society,’’ in M. H. Appley (Ed.), Adaptation level theory: A symposium., New York., 1971, pp. 287–302.
[3] E. Diener, R. E. Lucas, C. N. Scollon, “Beyond the hedonic treadmill: Revising the adaptation theory of well-being,” in American Psychologist, Vol 61(4)., May-Jun 2006, pp. 305-314.

