... title: Entropy-based Approaches to Mastermind



Abstract

We consider a variation of the well-known game of Mastermind to explore entropy-based approaches to the design of effective playing strategies. In the original game, the code maker composes a code of fixed length using a combination of different-colored pegs (or marbles). The code breaker takes a guess at the code, interprets the feedback provided by the code maker, and uses this information to devise her next guess. The code breaker’s goal is to guess the code in as few rounds as possible. A generic playing strategy consists of procedures for (i) identifying the set of feasible combinations, where prior feedback is used to determine which combinations are still viable and which not; and (ii) picking the combination that best serves the goal of reducing the number of feasible solutions as much as possible. 

In our proposed modification, the code maker generates the code by sampling (with replacement) from a code jar that contains an arbitrary number of pegs of different colors. Each color is chosen with probability proportional to the number of pegs of that color in the code jar. This entails that the probabilities of different candidate solutions in the feasible set might differ. Whereas in the regular version each combination is equally likely, in the modified version, a non-uniform distribution over colors in the code jar will lead to some combinations being more probable than others. To illustrate how this might impact the design of effective strategies, consider how an algorithm might choose between two alternative guesses, each resulting in a set of five feasible combinations, but where the probabilities of codes in set one and set two are [0.6, 0.1, 0.1, 0.1, 0.1] and [0.47, 0.47, 0.02, 0.02, 0.02], respectively. Which set would you rather play with going forward?

In order to quantify each set's uncertainty with respect to the hidden code, we use the notion of entropy. Previous approaches to the problem used the well-known Shannon entropy measure [1]. Building on this work, we conducted computer simulations with our probabilistic version of the game to explore a range of different entropy measures from a unified mathematical formalism called Sharma-Mittal generalized entropy framework. Ultimately, our goal is to translate potential theoretical findings to the domain of human psychology in order to investigate human intuitions about which queries are informative when playing Mastermind.

!! References

[1] C. Cotta, J.J.M. Guervós, A.M.M. Garćia, and T.P. Runarsson,  "Entropy-driven evolutionary approaches to the mastermind problem." in Parallel Problem Solving from Nature, PPSN XI. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 421-431

