... title: The importance of spatial conceptualization for cognitive load minimalization in graphical user interface



Abstract

In the last decades, rapid development of information and computation technology moved the human-computer interaction (HCI) from its peripheral position of a narrowly specialized working tool to the front position of our day-to-day life. Information technology became an intensively used means for obtaining information, for communication with distant world and ever more important in virtual-social interaction with the nearest environment. HCI has gone through a big evolution: from mainframe computers and punched cards, through text-based user interface and command line to the modern graphical user interface (GUI) of the personal computers available to laymen. Responsible for this development, apart from the technological progress are usability studies, whose main tasks are iterative evaluation and solving of users‘ interaction problems. The major focus of usability studies are unnatural or conflicting elements of user interfaces, which can be sources of unwanted cognitive load and induce interaction difficulties of perceptive, conceptual and motor character. Thus increased cognitive load, from the point of view of attention distribution, is demonstrated mainly in the transformation of limited cognitive resources, from the bottom-up perception to the top-down perception mechanisms. This unwanted concentration of user‘s attention, focused only to the problematic element of an interface, lowers user‘s chances of aiming at his targets and also his ability to perceive potential solutions offered by the interface at that moment. According to Baddeley‘s model of working memory the phenomenon can be interpreted as the overloading of the central executive part of the working memory which is responsible for the distribution of focused attention. The overload of the central executive part can be caused by supersaturation of one or several of its hierarchically subordinate memory elements, like the phonological loop, the visuospatial sketchpad and the episodic buffer. The likelihood of such an overload in the GUI environment is relatively high in comparison to the real world environment. This is so because in a GUI the user receives a substantial part of the information almost exclusively via the visual perceptory channel, thus increasing risks of overload of the central executive part through the supersaturation of the visuospatial sketchpad. This hypothesis is also supported by the multi-modal theories [1], which refer to a more effective memory coding through more modalities (more engrams). On the other hand, Baddeley’s visuospatial sketchpad is responsible for a simultaneous coding of two different, provably independent modalities. The neural independence and the independent parallel coding per se are described in the two-streams (where and what) hypothesis [2]. This hypothesis assign the ventral path to processes responsible for object recognition, processes connected to categorization and processing of spatial visual information to the dorsal path. Dorsal path is responsible for the spatial sensorimotor coordination. From neuro-psychological point of view, the dorsal path represents an independent neural area ergonomically assignable to a visuo-motor type of dynamic interaction. According to Englekamp’s enhanced model of working memory [3], the ventral path should also enable effective verbal interaction between pieces of symbolic information - applicable in multimodal interfaces (MUI).
A perspective solution for the purposes of GUI seems to be the reinforcement of the implicit spatial conceptualization (interaction in its respective perceptive and motor parts). Depending on the context, their metaphorical interconnections should also be reinforced. As far as the perceptual side of memory is concerned, spatial conceptualization in GUI makes sense in the long-term interaction. It is more specifically so in the acceleration of information search or the filtering of temporary irrelevant information (e.g via metaphors and traditional conventions). As far as the reactive level (short-term, immediate) is concerned, spatial conceptualization is important for a wider and more effective stream of consumption of new information (its transparent arrangement or enrichment by the implicit context of the spatial relations.) A lot of cognitive mechanisms are rooted in the principles described by the embodied cognition theory. Spatial conceptualization of the HCI‘s motor skills side is important in mapping and adjusting the interaction inputs of natural human habits – his reactive movements (image schemas, gestures). In the ideal case, a user-friendly GUI environment offers only affordances implicated from the visual stimulus (for which a natural motor reaction exists), so that the user intuitively, dynamically and in real-time perceives the environment’s reaction to his respective inputs without his prior experience.

[1] Paivio, A. (1969). Mental imagery in associative learning and memory. Psychological Review, 76, 241–263
[2] Ettlinger G. (1990). Object vision and spatial vision: the neuropsychological evidence for the distinction. Cortex 26 (3): 319–41.
[3] Engelkamp, J. (1998). Memory for actions. Hove, England: Psychology Press

