... title: Moral Attitudes Towards Non-human Animals and Meat Consumption in Omnivores and Vegetarians under Mortality Salient Condition



Abstract

Terror Management Theory (TMT) assumes humans to repress limitations of a physical body and therefore inevitability of death by seeking commitment to social identity (SI) and feeling worth more than others, for instance, status of superiority of humans (SH) over non-human animals. Society and culture are constituted in order to repress death awareness through apparently meaningful (but indeed fragile) values, traits, and beliefs. Under mortality salience condition (MS) or in confrontation with worldview-threatening positions, defence mechanisms enhance status of social constructions, such as SI and SH. Prior research in experimental existential psychology revealed MS primes enhancing ingroups and degrading outgroups, for instance, reinforcement of SH incorporates ingroup bias and prejudices [1]. 

In order to investigate SH, questionnaire part a) will test if omnivores boost negative judgment of farmed animals under MS, whereas companion animals should be degraded less, due to positive representation in SI. For that purpose death awareness will be primed in MS group, afterwards omnivore subjects may perform worse than control group and diametrical opposed to ethical vegetarians in a 30 items test concerning attitudes towards farmed, companion, and pest animals.
In line with a), also in b) omnivores’ performance under MS in judging statements on meat consumption and killing farmed animals may be diametrical opposed to ethical vegetarians’ performance under MS, compared to not death-related control groups: Both MS groups may strengthen their specific attitudes.
To verify MS effect, in c) death primed subjects in comparison to control group may boost defence of SI specific diet commitments against worldview-threatening positions that are opposed to own SI.

If hypotheses will be proved true, results may indicate that omnivores’ attitudes towards meat consumption and killing farmed animals are primary caused by SI, less by SH. Thereby a basic question [2] in regard to TMT is addressed, testing how enhancing identification with SI and reinforcing SH relate to each other.
My assumption that reinforcement of SH serves SI, supplies theories (e. g., [3]) claiming that acceptance of degradation and abuse of non-human animals, in particular farmed animals, is maintained by socially constituted norms with a potential explanation in terms of TMT.

!! Acknowledgements
Thanks to Alexander Batthyany for supervising this study.

!!References
[1] S. Solomon, J. Greenberg, T. Pyszczynski. ”The Cultural Animal: Twenty Years of Terror Management Theory and Research“ in Handbook of experimental existential Psychology, 1th ed., J. Greenberg, S. L. Koole, T. Pyszczynski, Ed. N.Y.: The Guilford Press, 2004, pp. 13-34.
[2] J. Vaes, P. G. Bain, B. Bastian. “Embracing Humanity in the Face of Death: Why Do Existential Concerns Moderate Ingroup Humanization?” JSP, vol. 154(6), pp. 537-545, Aug. 2014.
[3] M. Joy. Why We Love Dogs, Eat Pigs, and Wear Cows. San Fran.: Conari Press, 2010.

