... title: EYE MOVEMENT CORRELATES FOR THE FACE RECOGNITION



Abstract

Introduction
Face recognition is a topic in cognitive science which is being widely investigated and discussed, because it is one of the most important biologically and socially significant human abilities. Current cognitive and neural models of face perception propose that the perceptual processes involved in recognizing faces differ from those involved in recognizing objects, and that the neural substrate involved in face recognition is different from non-face stimuli. They considered the role of attention in detecting and categorizing faces, in recognizing the identity and in registering different expressions. Invariant aspects of faces underlie the recognition of individuals, whereas changeable aspects, such as eye gaze, expression, lip movement, underlie the perception of information, important for social communication. The way we perceive a face is also important and it affects how a face is remembered. Face perception provides information that is used to access knowledge about others; to infer their mood, interests or intentions and facilitates social interactions. Face recognition is a subfield of visual perception, where eye movements play an important role. Eye movement data may provide some new evidences in face perception, especially in recognition of known and unknown faces. Here we present some differences in recognizing (un)familiar (fe)male faces between male and female participants.
Materials and methods
26 students (8 males and 18 females) carried out the face recognition task with the eye-tracker device, based on deciding whether the face was familiar or not. 40 photographs of faces, selected from the Internet data (politicians, singers, actors, randomly selected photos of unknown persons), were shown to the subject. The photos had been devided into 4 groups with regard to the gender and familiarity of faces. We investigated the reaction time (RT) of recognition (i.e. the duration of looking into the face), first gaze in the area of interest, eye fixations (the duration of fixations and number of fixations in the fields of interest) and saccadic movements. We defined three areas of interest (AOIs): AOI 1–eyes, AOI 2–nose and AOI 3–mouth. The rest of the photo was called White Space (WS). We hypothesized that there was a difference in RT and in method of recognition (first fixation, fixations in the AOIs) of known and unknown faces and between male and female participants. We expected that the gaze would be directed longer to the unfamiliar face. We also claimed that there was no difference in RT and in the method of recognition of male and female faces.
Results
We analyzed 1040 trials (26 subjects x 40 faces). We grouped the trials by subject gender, face gender and familiarity of faces. In order to investigate our hypotheses we used Kruskal-Wallis One-way Analysis of Variance test. We found a significant difference in RT between male and female subjects (p=0,003) and known and unknown faces (p < 0,001), but we found no significant difference in RT between male and female faces. Next field of research were the numbers of fixations in the trials and in AOIs of the trials. We found that majority of trials had 3 – 4 fixations. We also found differences in numbers of fixations regarding subject gender (p=0,002) and familiarity of faces (p < 0,001). We could see that more female subjects made a decision within 1 to 3 fixations and also that in trials with familiar faces the decisions were made with fewer fixations. We also analyzed the number of fixations in AOI. In all trials (regarding areas 1, 2 and 3) eyes got the maximum number of fixations (35%), in comparison to nose (15%) and mouth (11%). We also found significant difference between male and female subjects (p < 0,001): female students had more fixations on eyes (40%) than males (26%) and fewer fixations on nose and mouth. But we found no significant difference in the number of fixations in AOI between known and unknown faces (p=0,092). We also analyzed first gazes in AOI. Frequency distribution showed that 51% of the first gazes in AOI were on eyes, 23% on nose and only 14% on mouth. We also grouped this numbers by subject gender and familiarity of faces and we found significant differences between male and female subjects with p < 0,001. The differences were in all AOIs: females looked more often than males first in the eyes (54% vs. 44%), but less often on the nose (17% vs. 38%). 
Discussion
The drawback of our experiment is that the number of male participants is not comparable to the number of females. But, since the number of trials is huge (320 trials of male participants and 720 trials of female) we could discuss the results nevertheless.  Analyses could confirm our supposition that there are significant differences in RT and in methods of recognition between male and female subjects. In average, females were recognizing faster (1417±1197 ms) than males (1572±1099 ms). We can also emphasize the differences in the method of face recognition. It is interesting that in most trials subjects decided just within a few fixations, which implies that recognition of faces is really automatic and with small attention. Frequency distribution of numbers of fixations showed that females decided about familiarity within 3 fixations more often and with more than 4 fixations less often than males. We also found significant differences in the number of fixations in AOIs. Women preferred to look in the eyes and around the face, probably the hair (40% for both) and they were rarely looking in the mouth (only 9%). Male looks were more distributed, also mostly on the eyes, but only with 26%; only then followed nose and mouth. Their attention on the field around the face was also noticeable (36%). Analyses showed significant differences between male and female participants also in the first gaze in AOIs, e.g. nose affects men much more than women (38% vs. 17%). We also hypothesized that there are differences in RTs and in methods of recognition of known and unknown faces and our results may partially confirm this supposition. As expected, we found significant difference in RTs between known and unknown faces, also grouped by gender. We could say that unknown male faces required a maximum RT, but not significantly different from unknown female faces. The differences appeared also in the number of fixations; unknown faces were recognized within 6 fixations less often than known faces. Interestingly, we found no significant difference in the method of recognizing known and unknown faces. The numbers of fixations in AOIs are very similar and this holds true for the first gaze in AOI as well. We can conclude that the way of recognizing a familiar face does not vary from the method of recognizing an unfamiliar face. Analyses of data also showed that the subject’s first gaze was almost equal in majority of trials during the experiment. This probably means that observers did not change the strategy of looking, also with regard to the familiarity or gender of faces. In the end, the results may also confirm our last supposition that there is no significant difference in recognizing male and female faces. Neither RTs nor numbers of fixations or fixations in AOIs showed any significant differences.
Conclusion
We have analyzed a huge amount of data and we could certify the importance of eye movement data for investigating spatial-temporal distribution of attention during face recognition, regarding the gender of observer and observee and the familiarity of presented faces. Although we have found lots of interesting results, the field of face recognition is wide and it is ready for new investigations, especially about the differences between male and female participants.  Recommendations for further research projects are influence of the background and colors (uniform or composed, abstract or realistic) on face recognition, segregation of familiar face in proximity to other faces, bottom-up vs. top-down recognition of faces (i.e. how extensive knowledge, past experiences and expectations affect decision making), and finally, the differences between male and female participants in recognizing faces with different facial expressions.
References
1. Nelson, C. A. (2001). The Development and Neural Bases of Face Recognition, Infant and Child Development. 10, 3–18 
2. Hancock, P. J. B., Bruce, V., Burton, A. M. (2000).  Recognition of unfamiliar faces.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 4, 9 
3. Liversedge, S. P, Findlay, J. M. (2000). Saccadic eye movements and cognition. Trends in Cognitive Science. 4, 1

