... title: Media-philosophy meets cognitive science



Abstract

Based on my mobility project "On the co-evolution of codification and mind" I want to investigate the impact of media and information technology on the human mind respectively cognition. 
The media-philosopher Vilem Flusser makes the case that the development of the structure of human mind can be correlated to the development of the structure of codification. 'Codification' he understands in the very largest sense of the term, including not only writing, but every form of intentionally externalised and manifested information. The onset of codification he sets in the Palaeolithic; the use of a stone as a weapon he describes as the most basal form of codification, which at the same time mirrors the beginnings of the human mind. Thereby Flusser follows a phenomenological reasoning: Engaging in a relation to the environment and making the stone to an object, the creature herself becomes a (mindful) subject. From this moment on the oneness is destroyed and the mind on the one hand and codification on the other, are born. Yet, for they are two sides of the same coin, they remain related dialectically throughout further evolution and every development is necessarily a development of both, the structure of codification and the structure of mind. On the level of codification the development can be reconstructed at least to some extent; after the use of three-dimensional artefacts, at a certain point in time men started to paint two-dimensional images and centuries later they invented one-dimensional writing. At present, finally, we are faced with a relatively new codification structure, namely programming. Following the hypothesis of co-evolution, these different stages offer valuable clues for the development of the human mind. The dimensions we can find on the codification side, we can correlate to the stages on the mind side: Starting with the leaving of the 4th dimension, our thinking transforms into 3-dimensional objective thinking, into 2-dimensional scenic thinking, 1-dimensional historical thinking and, finally, into 0-dimensional network thinking. 
Of course, Flusser's approach to the mind differs considerably from the approaches in cognitive science, not least because one of its conclusions is that the mind cannot be defined all for once, but is getting transformed unceasingly. Within the cognitive science communities the mind question often is approached either from a mentalist or from a neurology-based position; while cognitivism reduces cognition to symbol processing, connectionism often seems to equalise it to neurological processes. Beside these two paradigms there exist the so-called embodiment paradigm that, emphasising the role of body, action, situatedness and so on, give a broader and more integrative definition of the human mind. 
In my project paper I tried to demonstrate that Flusser's theory is in many aspects very much in line with this paradigm. First, they are both based on phenomenology. Phenomenology, as an alternative method to gain insight, favours the first-person-perspective; instead of acting on assumptions, it concentrates on concrete experience and the phenomenon itself. Phenomenologists opinion that there is no 'pure' perception but that perception necessarily involves interpretation. There is no object existing independently from the subject, just as there is no subject without an object. Both, subject and object are understood as extrapolations of an intentional relation between them. These fundamental ideas we find in Flusser's theory as well as in all the embodied approaches.
For my investigation I split up the embodiment paradigm into five approaches: Embodiment, enaction, situated cognition, enworlded mind and extended mind. Summarizing the results it can be said that the approaches each offer striking similarities with the one or the other of Flusser's dimensions respectively stages of consciousness. Embodiment itself and the idea of enaction play a crucial role especially in the in the 3rd dimension when codification, understood as manufacturing tools, is still a very physical act. However, it remains important throughout the other dimensions, for neither painting, nor writing or even programming would be possible without a perceiving and acting body. The situated cognition and enworlded mind approaches on their part are in a sense very close to the 2nd dimension; one of the challenges of this stage is it, to share or, phenomenologically spoken, to intersubjectify standpoints. The relations which are 'discovered' between the objects have to be communicated to others, in order to reach a certain agreement on the interpretation respectively the construction of a common world. The storing of information facilitates the social life and at the same time pushes it. The more symbolically uploaded the surrounding gets, the more the need for social behaviour is increasing. By this means the impact of biological constraints is constantly inclining, while the social, cultural and symbolic conditions become more and more effective. They become a crucial part of the specifically human environment; a claim that is equally one of the central aspects of the ideas of situatedness and enworldedment. Of course, speaking about the increasing symbolic character of the environment, we already arrived in Flusser's linear dimension. Writing is a manifested symbolic system in which the human being is embedded just as in the so called natural system. 
The most obvious similarities to Flusser's theory however are to be find in the last of the presently discussed approaches of the embodiment paradigm, Andy Clark's and Dave Chalmer's extended mind hypothesis; proponents of the latter hold that one's knowledge, and therefore also her cognition, cannot be clearly separated from the environment. In this view the borders of the body are no longer accepted as the borders of cognition or mind. Instead, the idea is that the mind extends into the surrounding. As such an extension of the mind we have to consider all cognitive processes that involve some kind of offloading to the environment, i.e. the use of every kind of artefacts, be it a hammer, language, writing, an i-phone, a notebook or even another person. In other terms, offloading seems to be identical with what Flusser defines as codification. The very potential of extended mind theory arises in the context of artificial intelligence and information technology, when the question comes into force  in how far the human being melts into machines. The answers given by Clark and Chalmers are definitively comparable to the implications of Flusser's scenario of the dimension 0. Both - extended mind theory and the five-dimensions-theory - equally implicate the reconsideration of concepts like "subject", "I" or "self". Clark and Chalmers write in this regard:
What, finally, of the self? Does the extended mind imply an extended self? It seems so. Most of us already accept that the self outstrips the boundaries of consciousness; [...] [Clark/ Chalmers, 1998]
With their idea of a decentralised mind without an allocatable 'owner' and all the implications and questions following this hypothesis, extended mind theory is actually exemplary for what Flusser describes as the general contemporary scientific trend, namely the dissolution and decomposition of everything, be it physical or mental. 
However, the conclusions drawn by Flusser are quite extreme: According to him we will have to give up individuality in favour of a supra-individual network, or, as he puts it, we must free ourself from subjection by engaging and (net)working together on a common project. This network - which will be our new lifeworld - will no longer be material, but it becomes more and more virtual. The physical and biological world will continue to exist, but by virtue of decomposition and recomposition we will be able to form it at our own discretion. Thereby Flusser does not stop at highly controversial methods as for example genetic engineering. For many proponents of the embodiment paradigm this opening towards virtuality on the one hand and clearly post-humanistic ideas on the other, might be seen as incompatible with their points of view. Thus, despite striking similarities, there can be found also important discrepancies and antagonisms. 
Although Flusser might be unique concerning the extremeness of his conclusions, he is by far not the only one identifying an interrelation between media and mind respectively codification and cognition. For my master thesis I plan to investigate this relation in a more integrative way, broadening the perspective from Flusser's point of view to media philosophy in general. 

References:
[1] Clark, Andy and David Chalmers (2008[1998]): The extended mind, in: Supersizing the Mind, by Andy Clark, Oxford: Oxford University Press
[2] Flusser, Vilem (1994): Schriften Band 3. Vom Subjekt zum Projekt. Menschwerdung, ed. by Stefan Bollmann/ Edith Flusser, Bensheim/Dusseldorf (1998[1997]): Bollmann Verlag 
[3] Flusser, Vilem (2009): Kommunikologie weiter denken. Die Bochumer Vorlesungen, ed. by Sylvia Wagnermaier/ Siegfiried Zielinski, Frankfurt am Main: Fischer Taschenbuch Verlag

