... title: Usability of ticket selection at ticket machines in Viennese public transport



Abstract

In a participatory and user centred design approach at the Danube University Krems, Austria a barrier free prototype of a new ticket vending machine for the Austrian Railways is designed. The focus lies at usability and accessibility. The needs of different user groups (including people with low technical affinity and those with limited mobility) should be considered to remove barriers for ticket machine usage and therefore mobility of these people in general. The theoretical background can be summed up by the terms of self-efficacy (How confident are users about their skills in using technology?), digital divide (The advance of information technology into daily life like ticket machines or ATMs poses potential problems for some people and maybe limits them in their daily activities.) and Design for All (Design for All is design for human diversity, social inclusion and equality. [1]).

At the ticket machines of the Austrian Railways one cannot only buy railway tickets but also tickets of local transport providers (e.g. Vienna Transport Authority). These are sold based on regional zones and it is also possible to buy one-day, monthly tickets etc. Usability studies done before explain that even experienced public transport users and locals can be confused by overlapping transportation systems (e.g. in Vienna there are three different systems available: Vienna Transport Authority, Transport System Eastern Region and Austrian Railways). For the moment the design of the ticket selection screen reflects the ticket structure to some degree, which is - according to user studies and interviews - too complex for infrequent but also frequent users [3]. The goal of this study is a better way of presenting the different ticket possibilities in a way so that it is accessible and not confusing to the customer [2], [3].

According to the participatory and user centred approach we have conducted fifteen interviews with people from different user groups (e.g. young/elderly, train customer or not, high or low technology usage) about the problem of ticket selection and confusion that may arise.The obtained results were used to create some design prototypes that are to be discussed with several participants in interviews. The results show that attention has to be paid to the wording of the button(s) since they serve as "gateway" to the ticket selection process. A proposal is to have two different buttons: One for special offers of the Austrian Railways and one for local transport tickets. Further hypotheses based on Gestalt laws are that different colours and high contrast differences may help to distinguish between different transportation systems. Also the use of logotypes (which are also depicted on busses and trains) may help users to recognize the visual identity of different systems. In the interviews different versions of the screen are compared and the participants preferences as well as her opinion about the differences are assessed. The results are then used to select the best rated version as design proposal for ticket selection.

[1] The EIDD Stockholm Declaration, adopted at the Annual General Meeting of the European Institute for Design and Disability in Stockholm, 2004
[2] Schreder, G., Siebenhandl, K., Mayr, E., & Smuc, M. The ticket machine challenge? Social inclusion by barrier-free ticket vending machines. In B. Sapio, L. Haddon, E. Mante-Meijer, L. Fortunati, T. Turk, & E. Loss (Eds.), The good, the bad and the challenging: The user and the future of information and communication technologies (pp. 780-790). Koper, Slovenia: ABS-Center, 2009
[3] Schreder, G., Siebenhandl, K., & Mayr, E. E-Inclusion in Public Transport: The Role of Self-Efficacy. In A. Holzinger & K. Miesenberger (Eds.), HCI and Usability for e-Inclusion; 5th Symposium of the Workgroup Human-Computer Interaction and Usability Engineering of the Austrian Computer Society, USAB 2009; Proceedings. (pp. 301-311). Berlin, Heidelberg, Germany: Springer, 2009

