... title: Phenomenology of Blind People



Abstract

##Context
Sight is our very important sense. Healthy adults rely on it maybe even more than we realize. The experience of seeing something is something so intimate and so tightly incorporated in our everyday experience, that we can hardly imagine life without it. Even harder, how blind people experience the world; from reading to communicating verbaly. In my project I would like to investigate more on phenomenology of blind people and how does their phenomenology differs from healthy adults. For example: how did (verbal) communication change? Are blind people better in recognizing the colour of our voice because they lack the visual information?
##Purpose
Because it is hard for me to imagine how blind people comprehend the world and themsleves, I would like to learn more about it through my research. I think it is important to investigate this area, because there is not much information available and still needs a lot of research.
##Method
Before I would start my project I will analyse some of the existing literature and researchs on the topic. After that I will choose five subjects for the project and then proceed with the interviews. I will then analyse and interpret the anwsers . 
##Results
Because I haven't started my research yet, I don't have any results to show. Yet, I can say I am expecting there are going to be some differences between healthy and blind individuals. It will be difficult, though, to isolate and compare some aspects of experiences due to differences in pre available information between the two groups. 
##Implications
I think there could be more researchs on this topic. I will try to point out some aspects that I haven't found in other researchs and complement the existing knowledge. 
##References
Sadato N., et al. (1996). Activation of the primary visual cortex by Braille reading in blind subjects. Nature, vol. 380. 526-528.
Fitzgerald, R. (1971). Visual Phenomenology in recently blind adults. American Journal Psychiatry. 1533-1539.
Ward, J. in Meijer, P. (2010). Visual experiences in the blind induced by auditory sensory substitution device. Consciousness and cognition. 492-500.
Tekcan, A. et al. (2014). Retrival and phenomenology of autobiographical memories in blind individuals. Memory. 
Kermauner, A. (2010). Fenomenologija samogenerirane slepote. Doktorska dizertacija. Univerza v Ljubljani, Pedagoška fakulteta.

