... title: Bottom-up visual attention in ecologically less valid stimuli:  A study assessing visual salience in social network graphs



Abstract

The amount of visual information incoming into the human eye is much greater than the cognitive capacity to process it fully. In order to cope with the vast visual information space, the most protruding, conspicuous properties are captured and compressed into smaller portions providing the visual consciousness with most important information from the environment. The visual salience model is a computational framework which calculates these salient, outstanding features which grab the attention of a visual scene according to the difference between neighboring regions regarding contrast, color intensity and edge orientations. For a short time after the stimulus onset in eye-tracking experiments with free-viewing conditions, the model can calculate the areas where the first fixations will occur most likely. This indicates bottom-up influences from stimuli on eye movements. The salient features of a scene can be represented by a salience map which shows potential eye fixation points1. Many previous experiments show visual guidance along salient features in ecologically more valid stimuli, like images of natural landscapes2,3. However, less ecologically valid stimuli, like images of abstract data used in visual analytics, have barely been tested on their potential to catch eye fixations along their salient areas.
In this study, I investigate whether images of social network graphs (sociograms) can guide the eye fixations in a bottom-up manner. Sociograms typically consist of nodes representing people and the edges representing the connections between them. Usually, the nodes and edges are distributed heterogeneously throughout the graph, standing in some areas more close to each other while in other areas they are arranged more sparsely. This has an impact on the map of the salience features in such a manner that there are areas which potentially can attract the eye fixations more than other. Eye movements have been recorded from ten participants (mean age: 39,9) who were asked to explore images of 10 sociograms each in a 5 second free-viewing condition in order to facilitate bottom-up influences.
Preliminary analysis of the eye-tracking recordings ground on two analysis approaches. First, the correlation between the mean salience values of actually performed fixation hits vs. random fixations. It could be shown that the means differ significantly. Second, the comparison between the percentage of actually performed fixation hits vs. random fixation hits on salient areas of interest (AOI) to total fixation number. Also here the percentages diverge significantly. Further, the overall portion of the observed fixations in the salient areas of interest (AOI) is 32,6 percent though these areas cover only 8 percent of the whole stimulus area. With the findings from former studies with ecologically less valid stimuli, the present results suggest that the visual salience model could be a potential general mechanism providing the visual consciousness with bottom-up extraction of features even from stimuli which the visual system is evolutionarily not adapted for. 

References:
[1] Walther D., Koch Ch. (2006): Modeling attention to salient proto-objects. Neural Networks, Vol. 19, P. 1395-1407
[2] Parkhurst D., Law K., Niebur E. (2002): Modeling the role of salience in the allocation of overt visual attention; Vision Research, Vol. 42, P. 107-123
[3] Peters R. J., Iyer A., Itti L., Koch C. (2005): Components of bottom-up gaze allocation in natural images; Vision Research, Vol. 45, P. 2397-2416

