... title: Life-satisfaction in Old Age: Exploring a harmonious ageing approach



Abstract

There are numerous life satisfaction theories and concepts in philosophy as well as in psychology. Moreover, there are differences in how Western and Eastern cultures conceptualize life-satisfaction and successful ageing. Specifically, the Western concept is grounded in a “curative” approach to ageing, where old age is seen as an extension of middle-age [1]. Recently, some philosophers have started questioning this, favoring a more Eastern approach which regards life-satisfaction in old age to be characterized by harmony and the importance of social bonds [1]. Additionally, the Western whole-life satisfaction psychological concept seems to be a misguided construct which does not reflect how people truly evaluate their lives. 

This study will explore which factors play an important role in current and overall life-satisfaction, and whether this supports more the Eastern philosophical approach. Furthermore, we will examine differences in temporal perspectives and their possible influence on current and overall life-satisfaction. Some studies have found differences in how young and old adults rate their life-satisfaction in relation to different time perspectives [2]. However, within the elderly population, the factors which drive this difference have not been established. Pursuant to this, the hypotheses are as follows:
1) The quality of social relations and bonds is the main factor that drives overall life satisfaction;
2) Participants who evaluate their past life and future prospects in a positive way will be more satisfied with current and overall life.

This is a cross-sectional population-based study, where the data was acquired from an established database in the Swedish National study on Aging and Care (SNAC)- Kungsholmen in Stockholm (n=3363, age= 60-104), through nurse interviews and self-reported questionnaires. Life Satisfaction Index-Z is a 13-item scale developed with the purpose of portraying life-satisfaction in old age [3]. Scores on the LSI-Z will be related to participants’ social network as well as covariates such as demographics, life-style, cognitive function, functional capacity and self-rated overall health. The hypotheses will be investigated using chi-squared test and regression analysis.

This study will shed light on which factors influence life satisfaction in old age and indicate whether an Eastern approach to life-satisfaction, focused on maintenance of social bonds, is appropriate in research on aging. 

!!References
[1] J. Liang and B. Luo, “Toward a discourse shift in social gerontology: From successful aging to harmonious aging,” J. Aging Stud., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 327–334, 2012.
[2] B. G. Loos, M. T. L. Roos, P. T. A. Schellekens, and U. Van Der Velden, “Lymphocyte Numbers and Function in Relation to Periodontitis and Smoking,” Pyschology & Aging, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 15–17, 2004.
[3] B. L. Neugarten, R. J. Havighurst, and S. S. Tobin, “The measurement of life-satisfaction,” J. Gerontol., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 134–143, 1961.

