... title: Autopoietic Systems Theory within Hegelian Speculative Philosophy



Abstract

Autopoiesis refers to a system capable of reproducing and maintaining itself. An autopoietic systems is autonomous and operationally closed, in the sense that there are sufficient processes within it to maintain the whole. I have tried to analyse further the basic logic of autopoietic theory and general systems theory in Hegelian speculative philosophy. To do this, I have generally addressed his Science of Logic and particularly the Notion as such; its “role” and “status” in Hegelian overall philosophical system and especially its determinateness in Nature. Especially, my aim is to understand dialectics “in practice”: in Hegel’s Philosophy of Nature (in concepts such as organisms, teleology, life, externality) and how is that connected to the Hegelian self-reference (or, self-relating negativity).
My main objective in this paper is to analyse the concept of self-referentiality as it is developed in the autopoietic systems theory. Autopoietic theory considers this kind of self-relation as a minimal form of life. Apart from the conceptualization of this self-referential closed system, I want to track this concept in history of philosophy to German idealism, from its beginning in Kant, in his regulative concept of teleological Organism, to Hegelian speculative philosophy where autopoietic structure refers to the Notional deployment as the Idea within his philosophical System.
My Thesis is that the Hegelian philosophical system is the first systematic inquiry which deals with the logic of autopoiesis. In his Science of Logic, he starts with Being, Nothing and Becoming which is nothing but autopoietic relation of Being itself, as being Thought, up to the Notion, as the explicit materiality of thought (or, ideal self-relation of externality of nature).
However, there is a paradox we have to keep in mind in operational closure. As Luhmann noted, operational closure is a condition for openness of the system; such systems are viewed as teleological in a functionalist state since they are directed toward this state. Such a minimum of self-relating is an elementary form of life through which the limit between Inside and Outside can emerge (Hegel even terms the organism as the “unity of inner and outer”). Autopoiesis is a logical bootstrap, a loop: a network produces entities that create a boundary. A self-distinguishing entity exists when the bootstrap is completed. This entity has produced its own boundary. It bootstraps itself out of a soup of chemistry and physics. This ontological paradox is the unity-in-difference of matter and life, reality and ideality, nature and thinking. This, and none other is the old metaphysical question of how can we account for a whole that is larger than the mere sum of its parts.
In Hegelian view of the Notion, it is also not (pre-)given but created – it posits itself by itself – it posits its own presuppositions. Autopoietic theory renews circular causation in efforts on conceptualizing operational closure as a mechanism capable of explaining the phenomenon of self-production.

