... title: Word Comprehension and its Concept Activations: The Influence of Context on Visual Search Task.



Abstract

An eye-tracking experiment covering the area of connections between lexical and perceptual systems, based on modern trends in psycholnguistics, is binding two main traditional lingustic approaches.

Many everyday tasks require people to rapidly interact with their visual surroundings. Reading, looking for a car at a parking place, or driving a bicycle, all tasks require people to frequently shift their attention to regions of the visual world that are relevant to the task. Measuring the shift in gaze is a great tool for providing insights into the functional and neural mechanisms underlying attention, perception, and memory. For several decades, within psycholinguistic, measuring eye movements has been one of the most widely used mechanism for studying written text comprehension. More recently, measuring eye movements has become a tool for studying spoken language comprehension as well as language production.
 	There are (out of many) two main traditional approaches in linguistic - the language-as-product tradition (language comprehension and production is a standalone cognitive process) and the language-as-action tradition (additional information influence the processing). Both of them could be viewed as complementary each to another, although they study language processing from a different angle. Since the past decade, with the development of eye tracking methods, a movement of bridging these two traditions, initiated by Michael Tanenhaus, has began to gain popularity among many linguists. Experiments within the action tradition are typical for their rich conceptual information whereas experiments within the product tradition are characteristic for their carefully selected stimuli and lexical input at the beginning. Opening up each tradition to empirical and theoretical challenges from the other tradition could lead to a better understanding of language processing. Our main aim is to find a method to better bridge both linguistic traditions - thus we constructed a modern eye-tracking experiment based on following theoretical assumptions:
       The additional conceptual information influence the word retrieval, object recognition and language comprehension. Moreover, the mental representation of a word is connected with the activations initiated by the word priming along different dimensions (visual - size, shape, color, or similarity in perceptual representation; lexical - semantical, syntactical, or cohort similarity; auditory - phonetic similarity; etc...). It is also known that many important findings about the connection between perceptual and lexical system have been found in past two decades. Yet, the lowest
 levels of the lexical system are still not completely examined and this is one out of many constrains of understanding human cognition in general.

	Experiment:
	Participants produce a visual-search task. They are instructed to read a word which represents an object in the real world, and then to find this object and click on it by mouse inside a screen containing four line drawing pictures with a different contextual environment. We are manipulating with the context type where the object is suppose to appear - either we put the object (e.g. skateboard) into a related environment (e.g. skate-park) or into an unrelated environment (e.g. fridge). Participants eye movements are recorded and later examined. The hypothesis assumes different behavioral effects (such as longer fixation or shifted eye movement) depending on the type of the context.

      We  used modern methods of eye measurement as it has became a standard for proving theories about language in the past 15 years and the main method for bridging mentioned two main linguistic traditions. The rich conceptual information typical for the experiments within action tradition is substituted with a visual contextual information of the environment in which the object is presented. The carefully selected stimuli typical for the experiments within product tradition is represented with a word input and minimalistic complexity of the whole experiment's design. We have built stimuli where the information are encoded in two types - lexically and visually. All these techniques are characteristic for a typical experiment within the movement of bridging mentioned linguistic traditions. The contribution difference in our experiment is in the extended contextual information where the context is presented in a "rich" visual form whereas the typical context information in experiments done in last 2 decades is presented as a spoken sentence or a simple line drawn object alone.

	For the final statistical analysis we used data from 15 participants (out of 26), all of them were semester exchange students from different college types. We provide 4 types of measured variables (the final statistics is beyond this abstract), all of them showing significant differences between the behavioral effects in different type of context. Thus, we proved our assumptions in the hypothesis and we have opened a space for theories about lexical processing and other forms of cognitive processing (such as perceptual).

	References:
Tanenahus, M. K., & Trueswell, J. C., 2004a. Approaches to Studying World-Situated Language Use: Bridging the Language-as-Product and Language-as-Action Traditions. MIT Press.
Rayner, K. 1998. Eye movement in reading and information processing: 20 years of research. Psychological Bulletin, 124(3), p. 372-422.
Revill, K. P., Aslin, R. N., Tanenhaus, M. K., & Bavelier, D. 2008. Neural correlates of partial lexical activation.

