... title: Evolution of movement control of a mobile robot in an unknown environment



Abstract

The research into mobile robotics has been receiving more and more attention recently. To study various approaches to control, cognitive science uses various methods. A lot of effort is put into the development of autonomous intelligent behavior for robots, especially for use in an unknown environment (Kala et al., 2009). The goal of this work is the implementation of a learning mechanism for a mobile robot based on a mix of a genetic algorithm and reinforcement learning, which can based on sensor data, enable the movement of a robot in an unknown environment. The advantage of this system is that it enables the autonomous definition of its behavior. A simulation environment was created for this system in which a virtual robot can move. This model is based on an actual existing prototype. The project uses machine nature-inspired algorithms that equip the agent with a very important ability - the ability to learn (Engelbrecht, 2007). This creates a significant need to motivate the mechanism, from which we require certain knowledge, correctly. In the theoretical part we provide a walkthrough through some related work as well as used methods. The designed learning mechanism was successfully implemented in a simulated model and in the end we successfully used it in a real world environment. 
We are thinking that, psychologists may find inspiration in the LCS model that is using a kind of analogy making based on evolutionary principles to form new strategies and behavior policies. And also, engineers may find interest in using the unconventional nature-inspired algorithm for robot control.
For mobile robot navigation we are using Learning Classifier System (LCS). “The Learning Classifier System algorithm is both an instance of an Evolutionary Algorithm from the field of Evolutionary Computation and an instance of a Reinforcement Learning algorithm from Machine Learning” (Brownlee, 2011). There are many different types of LCS. The two main approaches to implementing and investigating the system empirically are the Pittsburgh-style and the Michigan-style. Our robot is using XCS (accuracy-based classifier system) version of Michigan-style Learning Classifier.
In this work we have analyzed real and simulated environments from the point of view of carrying out our experiments in the area of cognitive robotics. We have decided to implement our first experiments in simulation environment. Due to our interest to implement XCS algorithms to the real mobile robot, it's essential to use real simulation environment and save certain kind of similarity between simulation and the real environment. Commercial or free simulators are on the high level, but also they have some disadvantages which, in our case, cause we cannot use them for this purpose. Due to this reason our own simulator has been created, which genuinely emulates real mobile robot with given attributes.
Simulator with LCS is application for the robot simulation, its movements in certain area, among obstacles such as triangle, square and circle. It is possible to control robot automatically (LCS) or manually. In the users part of simulator the eight values of distance sensors and actual position of the center of mass of robot are displayed. Further, it is possible to set multiple attributes of the robot such as speed, diameter of motion round the circle, safety mode, reward for the distance from the goal, sanction for unsuitable actions, adding obstacles, delete them or move them.
The designed algorithm allowed a real robot to learn to navigate in an unknown environment, learn the principles of collision avoidance and it exhibits significant learning properties. We conclude that the used algorithm is appropriate for this type of task. 

Keywords:  robot, reinforcement learning, genetic algorithm, learning classifier system

References

Brownlee, J. (2011). Clever Algorithms: Nature-Inspired Programming Recipes. First Edition, Lulu Enterprises, January 2011. ISBN: 978-1-4467-8506-5.
Engelbrecht, A. P. (2007). Computational Intelligence: An Introduction. (L. Wiley John Sons, Ed.)IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks. Wiley.
Kala, R., Shukla, A., Tiwari, R., Rungta, S., & Janghel, R. R. (2009). Mobile Robot Navigation Control in Moving Obstacle Environment Using Genetic Algorithm, Artificial Neural Networks and A* Algorithm. 2009 WRI World Congress on Computer Science and Information Engineering, 705-713. IEEE.

