... title: Communication in exhibition spaces



Abstract

I see this project as an optimistic attempt to bring, in Frankfurt school theorist’s eyes, from culture industry polluted public over to the less standardized, manipulative and more schizophrenic works of society. 

The main questions of this project were: 1. What is the attitude of involved parties (curators, artists and visitors) towards making exhibitions available and 2. What would encourage communication and interpretation in the exhibition, making it more comfortable for visitors.

The project is in its basic question interdisciplinary as it tries to merge knowledge from different areas to better understand the social issue. The theoretical part consisted of studying theories from various disciplines (sociology, philosophy, psychology, literature, culturology, anthropology, neurology and museology), and even though it started with revision of aesthetic theories, they did not turn out to be very useful for practical solutions I was trying to find. That is why I later overlooked the aesthetic part of the experience and focused on the social part - studying exhibition space, visitors’ motivation, needs and goals, theories about interpretation of artwork and the impact of knowledge on it, diving into sociological theories about cultural capital and social class etc.

The empirical part consisted out of interviews with people, who play main roles in this field - researchers of exhibiting spaces, curators and employees in cultural institutions, artists, graphic designers, architect and visitors. I made opened interviews about the mentioned problematical situation and received very different answers, which pointed to additional problem of communication and cooperation among them.

The conclusion of the project is not as explicit as I expected it to be, since I wanted to find specific solution. But to summarize, the results of the project show that issues in this field lie in slow modernization of exhibition spaces (especially public representation of it), attitude of public, based on stereotypes from the beginning of previous century, lack of fresh approaches towards exhibiting high culture and especially ego war between artists, curator and public, where curator and artist emphasize the role of copyright in such a way, that it becomes uncomfortable for the visitor, which consequently does not feel invited to subjective interpretation and adopts disinterested attitude. I also realized that Slovenian institutions and public both have specific characteristics, both in need for specific solutions. I see the possible resolution in recognizing the importance of subjective interpretation, visitors’ active participation and satisfying other motives than mere adoration of exhibited pieces as the only reason to come to the exhibition, thus loosening the barriers between institution and public and also making the whole experience more comfortable. 

1.	Kirshenblat Gimblett, B.(2004). Museum – A refuge for the utopian thought Die Unruhe der Kultur: Potentiale des Utopischen.
2.	Leder, H. et al. (2004). A model of aesthetic appreciation and aesthetic Judgments. British Journal of Psychology 95, p. 489–508. The British Psychological Society.
3.	O’Doherty, B. (1999): Notes on gallery space. In: Inside the white cube: The ideology of the gallery space. University of California.

