... title: EEG mu rhythm desynchronisation: an electrophysiological evidence for mirror neurons activity



Abstract

Mirror neurons are multimodal association neurons with motor properties, found in premotor and posterior parietal cortex, that increase their activity and fire not only during action execution, but also while observing [1] or hearing another individual performing the same or a similar action. These neurons have been originally discovered in the ventral premotor cortex of the macaque monkey [1]. Main cortical regions associated with mirror neuron system in humans are the anterior part of the inferior parietal lobule and the inferior part of the precentral gyrus plus the posterior part of the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) and posterior part of superior temporal sulcus (STS) [1]. According to ‘‘direct-matching hypothesis’’ of action recognition which claims that individual can recognize actions performed by others by mapping the observed action also with auditory stimuli on his/her own motor representation of the observed action, mirror neurons play important role in imitation, empathy and also theory of mind [1].

Electrophysiological index of mirror neuron system activity is specific EEG oscillation called mu- rhythm [2]. Mu-rhythm is typical oscillation for motor rest and becomes suppressed and desynchronised during active movements and somatosensory stimulation [2]. Mu-rhythm is EEG rhythm with dominant frequency in 8-13 Hz and  ~ 20 Hz bands [2]. Suppression of the resting mu-rhythm indicates that the underlying neuronal tissue has become more desynchronised, reflecting an increased processing load also of the  mirror neurons [3].

With focus on previous knowledge of mirror neuron system properties and EEG mu rhythm  characteristics, we created an EEG experiment, in which we proposed two hypotheses. In the first hypothesis, we claim that there is the highest mu power spectral density (PSD) during the relax condition and similarities of mu-rhythm PSD suppression in self motor movement and the same observed movement condition. Our second hypothesis claims that there are contralateral correlations in mu-rhythm PSD strength according to left/right hand in nonrest conditions and hemispheric differences in mu power also in nonrest conditions. 

We performed several preliminary measurements, which served as indicators for selection of the most suitable nonrest stimulus in terms of mu suppression (mouse scrolling, cup grasping, painting and fingerwalk). Mouse scrolling arose as the most significant one, that pointed out better outlook for future experimentation.

With the knowledge from preliminary results, we chose vertical index finger movement (tapping) as the most suitable stimulus for our main experiment, whose results should prove our hypothesis. We programed E-Prime application that was handling and projecting our stimuli across three different types of conditions. The first was observing simple motor movement (index finger tapping on the desk) of left and right hand. The movement was recorded and presented in short video. The second type condition was self motor movement (index finger tapping on the desk) of both hands. Third was motor relax condition.

We were recording event related EEG signal for each stimulus using 32 active electrodes in international 10-10 placement and 2 VEOG and 2 HEOG electrodes. For nonrest conditions we recorded 5 sec. continuous chunk of data from stimulus onset, for rest condition it was 15 sec. from stimulus onset. We recorded data from group of 25 healthy adult participants, in age from 20 to 32 years, from which 14 were females and 11 males. 

After recording phase ocular effects correction according to EOG signal and lowpass and highpass filter were applied to all 32 electrodes. Few more noisy electrodes were filtered individually. Frequency-domain analysis was used for data evaluation. We used Fast Fourier Transformations to obtain PSD in 8-13 Hz and 15-25 Hz bands, which are mu typical bands. We made grand average of PSD for each participant for each electrode. These data used for statistical analysis.

In statistical analysis we wanted to show statistical significant decrease of mu PSD in nonrest conditions. For averaged PSD over participants we computed the mean natural logarithm ratio of power in the mu frequency (8–13 Hz and 15–25 Hz) during the observation and the same self movement conditions, over the power in the rest condition for scalp locations over the sensorimotor cortex area. We focused on C3 and C4 electrodes because these cover the best motor area responsible for volitional index finger movement. T-tests comparing mu log ratio during observation and movement conditions to zero showed statistically significant suppression in both conditions. This finding supports our first hypothesis and also known literature, claiming that each “version” of the motor action – executed or observed leads to decrease of signal power, as a result of the mu rhythm desynchronisation, compared to the relax state. For our second hypothesis we computed the mean natural logarithm ratio of PSD in the mu frequency (8–13 Hz and 15–25 Hz) during the observation of index finger movement and the same self movement of index finger conditions, over the power in the same movement condition in contra- and ipsi-lateral scalp locations to obtain ipsilateral and contralateral mu power suppression value. T-tests comparing mu log ratio of ipsi- and contra-lateral views in both observation and movement conditions to zero showed statistically insignificant changes in both hemispheres during both conditions. These results are contradicting our second hypothesis. However, from this finding we can assume that mirror neuron system activity is not hemispherically differentiated for distinguishing left and right side movement, but rather approximate to distinguish and understand any kind of movement.

[1] Rizzolatti, Giacomo, and Laila Craighero, THE MIRROR-NEURON SYSTEM, 2004 
[2] Pineda, Jaime A, The functional significance of mu rhythms: Translating “seeing” and “hearing” into “doing”, 2005
[3] Oberman, Lindsay M., Joseph P. McCleery, Vilayanur S. Ramachandran, and Jaime A. Pineda, EEG evidence for mirror neuron activity during the observation of human and robot actions: Toward an analysis of the human qualities of interactive robots, 2007

