... title: Role of language in relational category discrimination



Abstract

Language has a very essential role in human cognition. Numerous studies refer to its necessity for certain types of cognitive tasks. These tasks can be various.

We are interested in the role of language in categorization of visual stimuli. Although many organisms are capable of categorizing input on the perceptual or associative basis without any use of language, higher order relational and analogical categorization may require encoding into other modality – association with verbal label (Zentall et al., 2008).

Young & Wasserman (1997) studied relational category formation in pigeons. They showed them arrays of 16 icons that were either “same” or “different”. The task of pigeons was to make a distinction between these two states. Pigeons achieved high level of discrimination and generalization. However, when presented with mixed or reduced input, pigeons answered according to perceptual variability of the input array (e.g. there were just 2 different icons in the array and pigeons repeatedly chose option “same”). On the other hand, human intuitive answer would be to treat the arrays categorically based on theory. They are either “same” or “different”. In order to do this, the animal has to be able to judge the relations between the icons.

This phenomenon can be explained by the Shannon’s Information theory (Shannon, 1948). This theory understands the diversity of categorical variable - the entropy - as a number of information bits that are necessary to identify each item. It means that 16 identical items have entropy of 0.0 bits, because there is no variability and 16 different items have entropy of 4.0 bits because there are 16 different categories. The entropy decreases in mixed or reduced arrays. E.g., two different items have entropy 1.0, which is closer to entropy 0.0 than 4.0. In this case, pigeons discriminate two different icons as “same”.

Young & Wasserman (2001) later ran a similar study on human subjects. They found out that there were two distinctive clusters of subjects in their behavior. 80% of subjects treated the arrays categorically (as either “same” or “different”) while 20% of the subjects behaved similarly to the perceptually based answers of pigeons. One of the proposed explanations is that “the categorical discrimination may have been mediated by the use of previously learned linguistic labels for the displays” (Young & Wasserman, 2001).

Our project consists of two parts:

1.	We would like replicate the original experiment of Young & Wasserman (2001) with human subjects. We expect 20% subjects will not treat the arrays categorically, but according to perceptual variability.

2.	We would like to test the hypothesis that verbal labels might facilitate categorical discrimination by replicating the experiment using verbal shadowing (used in studies such as Hermer-Vazquez et.al, 1999) as a secondary task to impair immediate performance of phonological loop. In this task subject will have to listen to some text, repeat it word by word while performing the original task.

We expect that overloading the verbal modality could shift the distribution of clusters towards perceptually based discrimination.
References:

Young, M. E., & Wasserman, E. A. (1997). Entropy detection by pigeons: Response to mixed visual displays after same–different discrimination training. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 23(2), 157. American Psychological Association.

Young, M. E., & Wasserman, E. A. (2001). Entropy and variability discrimination. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 27(1), 278. American Psychological Association.

Zentall, T. R., Wasserman, E., Lazareva, O. F., Thompson, R. K. R., & Rattermann, M. J. (2008). Concept Learning in Animals. Comparative Cognition & Behavior Reviews, 3, 13 -45.

C. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of  communication,”  ACM SIGMOBILE Mobile Computing and Communications Review, vol. 5, 2001, p. 3–55.

