... title: Double effect of curiosity deficiency on memory impairment with patients suffering from dementia syndrome



Abstract

Introduction
The number of people suffering from dementia syndrome is likely to double every 20 years, thus leading to over 80 million diagnosed people by 2040. Memory impairment is one of the main deteriorations within this syndrome and curiosity might have double effect on it.
Based on available studies and theories I tried to clarify possible double effect of curiosity on dementia progression. Better understanding of relation between curiosity and dementia progression could serve as a promising ground for further development and implementation of available treatments for patients suffering from dementia syndrome.  
Background
Curiosity is not merely the desire to learn new information, but can also be described with concepts like exploratory behavior, sensation seeking or motive force to order reality. Curiosity can also be presented as natural human tendency to make sense of the world or as motivation to master one’s environment (Byman, 2005). Low curiosity can, according to this view, hinder the desire to understand and manage the intrinsic and external set of stimuli that influence one’s life. Concepts like curiosity, motivation and interest overlap in several characteristics, and all originate in the same system, which is the basic motor for the individual energy to act (Hari and Kujala, 2009). Though they differ to some extent in their behavioral expressions it is hard to make clear distinction between them, which makes it even harder to differentiate among their consequences. 
Dementia syndrome can be characterized as decline in memory functioning, accompanied with impairment in at least one other cognitive ability. A number of studies investigated the effect of curiosity on learning and memory performance with population of children, adolescents and young adults, however not much in this field has been done with population of older adults. Additionally, numerous studies showed correlation between dementia progression, specially memory impairment, and depression or apathy. Depression and apathy are very common symptoms appearing in dementia and differentiation between both is not a simple one, though we can see difference in some behavioral expressions and involvement of different dopaminergic agents. Several reports have been made on pharmacological treatments being appropriate for depression treatment, but having opposite impact on the presence of apathy, and vice versa (Tagariello et al., 2009). Additionally can depression be seen as one of the risk factors for dementia and has reciprocal effect with dementia progression, both in the domain of speed and the volume of the impairment (Korczyn and Halperin, 2009).
Model
In my model I dissected influence of curiosity on dementia progression into two effects – first is direct impact through learning and second mediated by emotions.
1.	Causal effect – curiosity & learning
Desire to learn and know has strong influence on our learning process and thus on memory functioning. Information-gap theory claims that the main point of curiosity is the desire to fulfil the gap between what one knows and wishes to know, hence the higher is curiosity, stronger is the desire to reduce the discrepancy in information gap of our knowledge and learn something new. Cognitive process theory of curiosity gives emphasis on the process of creating, maintaining and resolving conceptual conflicts in order to master one’s category system (Byman, 2005). Maintaining information means understanding and remembering it, hence involving our memory system. High curiosity and interest can generate positive effect, which results in facilitation of knowledge acquisition and cognitive performance. Lack of curiosity decreases the desire to learn and explore, hence influences our memory functioning and increases the progression of memory impairment.
2. Causal effect – curiosity & emotions
Loss of interest is one of the basic symptoms of depression. One of the theories proposed interest to be a motivational variable that links affective and cognitive component of motivation. To develop the idea further, we can use Beswick’s concept of intrinsic motivation as a synonym for curiosity and hence the correlation of loss of interest, motivation and curiosity to the depression (Byman, 2005). To continue we can define apathy as “lack of motivation not attributable to decreased level of consciousness, cognitive impairment and emotional distress” and can dissect it into three main components – behavioral, cognitive and emotional, with all three components having strong effect on performance of our memory system (Tate and Unit, 2009). Low or even absent state of curiosity, interest or motivation can lead to negative emotional states (i.e. depression or apathy) which further accelerate the progression of dementia.
Discussion
Number of studies has been done in the field of brain plasticity, showing evidence on efficient recruitment of particular brain regions. Several studies claimed similar effect with dementia patients, therefore further development of cognitive treatments and therapies could lead dementia patients to effectively activate compensation mechanisms in our brain. 
Because the majority of researches in the field of curiosity have been done with young population I believe some further studies with adults are needed to reveal the full potential this construct has on our performance even in an adult life. With better understanding of correlations between curiosity, memory, emotions and dementia progression we could use curiosity as a trigger to stimulate usage of our memory system and improve our emotional states, which coul slow down the progression of dementia. 
References:
Byman, R. (2005). Curiosity and sensation seeking: a conceptual and empirical examination. Personality and Individual Differences, 38(6), 1365-1379. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2004.09.004 
Hari, R., & Kujala, M. V. (2009). Brain basis of human social interaction: from concepts to brain imaging. Physiological reviews, 453-479. doi:10.1152/physrev.00041.2007.
Korczyn, A. D., & Halperin, I. (2009). Depression and dementia. Journal of the neurological sciences, 283(1-2), 139-42. doi:10.1016/j.jns.2009.02.346
Tagariello, P., Girardi, P., & Amore, M. (2009). Depression and apathy in dementia: same syndrome or different constructs? A critical review. Archives of gerontology and geriatrics, 49(2), 246-9. doi:10.1016/j.archger.2008.09.002 
Tate, R. L., & Unit, R. S. (2009). Apathy after acquired brain impairment: A systematic review of non-pharmacological interventions. Neuropsychological Rehabilitation, 19(4), 481-516. doi:10.1080/09602010902949207

