... title: Creating Knowledge of Need: A Methodological Framework for its Abductive Inference



Abstract

!!!! Creating Knowledge of Need: A Methodological Framework for its Abductive Inference 

!! Introduction

The fulfilment of humans needs is a physiological prerequisite for the individual's survival and prosperity [1]. Hence, the knowledge about needs is valuable assuming that knowing one’s need, rather than a certain satisfier to that need, enables us to find new/different ways of need satisfaction. Surprisingly, first empirical data suggest that people hardly talk about their needs and desires but rather about certain satisfiers meaning concrete objects or conditions when asked about what they need for their personal well-being. Furthermore, some philosophers claim that we cannot be aware of our needs directly but only of their satisfiers. [2]

!! Research Question and Methods

The question at hand is how researchers can look “behind” an observable satisfier (e.g. objects, state of affairs etc.) and identify the underlying need. So, the main concern is to make explicit what might be implicitly defining our acting. The aim of this empirical master thesis which is based on a project with the Austrian Federal Economic Chamber with about 150 untrained participants is to propose a replicable and consistent methodological framework for creating need knowledge which can be understood as explicit knowledge about one’s needs and desires. The project aims at finding a method for non-instantaneous settings meaning that data acquisition and analysis are sequential rather than iterative (no possibility for researchers to check back directly what the underlying need is).

I am going to employ qualitative research methods in general and an abductive approach [3] in particular. Finding hypothetical explanations (needs) for the satisfiers observed (questionees report about their imagined future of a fulfilled professional life) should be supported by heterogeneous paradigmatic views on the data. Those views are based on different theories and approaches (e.g. theory of causality, generative listening [2]) and should be crystallized into sets of questions promoting the abductive process. Finally, to transform the bunch of hypothesis generated by researchers into verified knowledge about needs, a concluding feedback loop integrating the questionees in the knowledge creation process once again (communicative validation [3]) will be implemented.

!! Structure

After dealing with the theoretical backgrounds including the concept of need (and its relation to satisfier and desire), the epistemological foundations of need knowledge, theories on abductive reasoning, hermeneutics and communicative validation, I will evaluate approaches being potentially valuable for the abductive reasoning process and finally tailoring them to be usable for the research project (views on data). Additionally, I will discuss the role of researchers in and their effects on the knowledge creating process.

!! References

[1] G. Thomson, “Fundamental Needs,” in The Philosophy of Need, S. Reader, Ed. Cambridge: Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement, 2005.
[2] S. K. McLeod, “Knowledge of Need,” International Journal of Philosophical Studies, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 211–230, Jun. 2011.
[3] H. Åsvoll, "Abduction, deduction and induction: can these concepts be used for an understanding of methodological processes in interpretative case studies?," International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education, (ahead-of-print), pp. 1-19, 2013.

