... title: !!!! Debiasing the framing effect in medical decision making: A comparison of methods



Abstract

!! Introduction

The framing effect occurs when different frames -- the way information is presented -- for logically equivalent statements elicit different decisions. This study compares two debiasing methods: an  already proven successful procedure designed for decisions that are based on hypothetical medical 
decision-making vignettes (i.e., specific debiasing by listing advantages versus disadvantages of  possible treatments) versus a general introduction to heuristics and biases, which has proven unsuccessful in previous studies. These two methods have never been tested in the same sample.  Thus, this is the first study to compare all three approaches to the framing effect (i.e., no debiasing, 
general information, and specific debiasing) within one sample. Compared to Almashat et al.’s study [1], upon which we build, this study has a wider range regarding participants’ age and nationality, thereby strengthening our results due to the de-correlation of possible influential factors. We focus on medical decision making for maintaining the ecological validity by applying a real world problem and increasing people’s involvement due to personal relation to the topic. 

!! Methods

Three experiments were established. The first measures the effect of a general introduction to cognitive biases and heuristics (the debiasing technique) versus general information about the causes of lung cancer (the control condition). The second assesses the effect of listing advantages and disadvantages of possible treatments against lung cancer (the debiasing technique) versus general information about the causes of lung cancer. The third evaluates the effect of listing the treatments’ advantages and disadvantages (the debiasing technique) versus a general introduction to cognitive biases and heuristics. The test construction ensures that all conditions require the same cognitive effort and test duration. The bases for decisions are three vignettes that contain information about treatments for lung cancer in three hypothetical hospitals. The scenarios present information about the outcomes of radiation and surgery after the diagnosis of lung cancer and are either framed as a survival or mortality probability. All three treatment outcomes are presented in a cumulative probability format (CP), an interval probability format (IP), and a life expectancy format (LE). 84 participants were randomly assigned to one of the six groups. 

!! Results

The chi-square analyses for the control group (mortality and survival frames) and the different formats (CP, IP, LE) yielded non-significant results (p>.05). Therefore, no framing effects were  found and a further analysis to examine the debiasing procedure is not relevant as the debiasing  effect can only be tested when the framing effect can be proven with a significant Frame x Condition Chi-Square value. Based on this result, a follow–up logistic regression would be performed to assess whether the expected debiasing effect can be shown.
These results contradict the findings by Almashat et al. [1] and cast doubt on the possibility to show the framing effect under the given circumstances. 

!! Reference

[1] S. Almashat et al., “Framing effect debiasing in medical decision making,” Patient Education and Counseling, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 102–107, Apr. 2008.

