... title: Tuning and Verifying a Psychologically Plausible Cognitive Architecture Using LIDA-based Cognitive Software Agents



Abstract

LIDA (Learning Intelligent Distribution Agent) is a biologically inspired cognitive architecture aiming to explain and model human cognition which has a partial computational implementation (Baars & Franklin, 2009). In order to verify LIDA’s claims, we will develop three LIDA-based cognitive software agents performing psychological experiments, adjust their internal parameters, and compare their behaviour data with human subjects. If a tuned set of internal parameters can be found whose values remain constant when disparate datasets from different experiments conducted on human subjects are reproduced, that would provide substantial evidence of the accuracy and usefulness of the conceptual cognitive model. We will also describe and implement a novel visual system for the LIDA model.

Since the processes in LIDA are modelling high-level neuroscientific processes, it is possible to correlate LIDA modules with neural correlates. Neuroscientific data with high temporal resolution, combined with the aforementioned mapping, can be used to adjust the LIDA computational framework’s internal parameters. If the software agents based on such an adjusted model of cognition behave similarly to human subjects in psychological experiments, yielding comparable data – using only the parameters predetermined from neuroscience data, without any adjustment to the experimental paradigm – this would highly increase the plausibility of the LIDA model and its underlying hypotheses. However, if there is no set of parameters which results in agents modeling human behavior (and matching human data) in all experimental paradigms, there is probably a conceptual mistake in the model or in the implementation. 

While there are a number of cognitive architectures that have contributed to the understanding of cognition and to the development of intelligent agents – such as SOAR, ACT-R, and CLARION –, the LIDA model has important advantages. Unlike AI-inspired symbolic approaches, it has been built on central theories of neuroscience and cognitive science – such as the global workspace theory, situated / embodied cognition, perceptual symbol systems, memory by affordances, and cognitive action-perception cycles – and it can thus claim a higher degree of plausibility. Furthermore, LIDA is currently the only major comprehensive cognitive architecture providing explanations of functional consciousness. This type of consciousness is facilitated by the global workspace hypothesis, which suggests the existence of a fleeting memory capacity that enables access between brain functions that are otherwise separate. The proposed main purpose of functional consciousness is to integrate, provide access, and coordinate the functioning of very large numbers of specialized networks that otherwise operate autonomously (Baars & Franklin, 2009). 

We will develop three cognitive software agents based on the partially implemented computational LIDA framework in order to substantiate LIDA’s hypotheses, and to increase the plausibility of the claim that LIDA accurately models human cognition.
The first cognitive software agent will perform a simple reaction time experiment, primarily for the purpose of verifying the timing parameters derived from neuroscience data. It will operate in a simple environment consisting of a light (red or green) and a button (pressed when the light turns green).
The second agent will perform a psychological experiment suggested by Allport (1968), with the intention to strengthen LIDA’s claim that consciousness is discrete. Specifically, it will allow for a comparison of the Discrete Moment Hypothesis – which states that consciousness is comprised of distinct and non-overlapping conscious ‘moments’, within which all time-order information is lost – and the Continuous (Travelling) Moment Hypothesis, which considers conscious ‘moments’ to correspond to continuously moving segments of incoming sensory information. In this experiment, a horizontal line appears on a screen in front of the subject in one of 12 positions, and rapidly changes position moving upward, starting again at the bottom when it reaches the top of the screen. Depending on the cycle time (thus, on the speed of the line), subjects can consciously perceive a single line, or multiple lines, or, below a specific cycle time, all lines at the same time – in which case, no movement can be perceived any more. This experimental setting will be used to show that LIDA’s discrete consciousness model is accurate, and that the timing constraints of a conscious “window” of experience of LIDA software agents match those of human subjects.
The third agent will model an attentional blink experiment with a rapid serial visual presentation of images, in order to verify LIDA’s attention mechanism, and at the same time to provide a harder experimental context (involving image processing) in which to test LIDA’s hypotheses and parameters. The agent will be presented 8 images it has never seen before (but which contain objects that its visual system has been trained for) in rapid succession, and it will have to report two target images in this series by pressing buttons. In similar settings, human subjects often fail to report the second target image if it is presented shortly after the first image – this is the attentional blink phenomenon. The agent reproducing this experiment should have accuracies and performance comparable to human subjects, and should recognize the objects prominently present in the images.
A visual object recognition algorithm has to be developed to perform this task, since the LIDA framework does not have implemented vision yet. The proposed visual system will be based on invariant feature detection and aims to be plausible and at the same time to perform with a high recognition rate. After prominent features in the input image have been detected by an appropriate feature extraction algorithm, a feature space is constructed in the sensory memory. A large number of feature detectors, similar to the feature detectors in the human visual cortex, will observe their particular location in the feature space and pass activation to their corresponding perceptual symbol if the feature space and thus the input image contain their feature. If a perceptual symbol representing an object receives enough activation from enough feature detectors, then that object can be said to have been recognized in the image – and it can rise to consciousness if it is attended to. 

If all three of these cognitive software agents yield behaviour data that is similar to data from human subjects, and if they do so using the same parameter set, that would highly increase the plausibility of the LIDA model, and strengthen its hypotheses. It would also show the versatility of this model - that it can be applied in a wide range of experimental paradigms - and highlight its explanatory power. It would also show that human functional consciousness, and the human attentional mechanism, can be modelled computationally. Finally, a plausible and detailed computational model of cognition might yield empirically verifiable hypotheses and claims about cognition and thus lead to new insights in cognitive science.

References:

[1]	Allport, D.A., 1968. Phenomenal simultaneity and the perceptual moment hypothesis. British Journal of Psychology, 59(4), pp.395-406.
[2]	Baars, B.J. & Franklin, S., 2009. Consciousness is computational: The LIDA model of global workspace theory.
[3]	Bay, H., Ess, A., Tuytelaars, T., Van Gool, L., 2008. Speeded-up robust features (SURF). Computer Vision and Image Understanding, 110(3), p.346–359.

