... title: The Temporality of Innovative Thinking Ontological Reflection on the Structure of innovative – contemplative Thought Process



Abstract

Obviously, world and cognition are a correlative unity. Due to their dynamic circularity, neither of them can be the source of new knowledge, innovative ideas. Therefore the only possible and logical source of new knowledge, except the involvement of super-terrestrial entities, seems to be this very same primordial unity of world and cognition preceding and underlying our rational distinction between knowing subject and known object. Modern science has widely neglected this fundamental realm, until recent attempts by a few Cognitive Scientists to reintegrate it. Francisco Varela calls this fundamental element of human existence the lived first-person experience and claims that it is the “blind spot” of our society (2001). Together with Natalie Depraz and Pierre Vermersch (2003) he made an interdisciplinary attempt to establish a method appropriately illuminating this “blind spot”. Based on this research it is the aim of this paper to clarify the question: “What is the ontological dimension underlying the innovative thought process?”
By combing phenomenological reduction, psychological introspection and spiritual meditation, they could successfully identify the general structure of such practices. This so-called “core cycle” of subjective experiencing consists of the three consecutive phases “suspension”, “redirection” and “letting-go”, potentially resulting in the birth of a virgin idea. This process-structure originates from the phenomenological concept of epochέ, which means the bracketing of all our (non-)scientific knowledge, beliefs and theories about the world so far. This is equivalent to the first step – suspension. Thus, we open up a new (cognitive) space that should become the focus of our attention by the act of redirection. If anything, the third step of letting-go could be called a mind-set: a curious openness of attentive patience towards the absolute freedom of future possibilities. This three-part process finalizes in an intuitive act of sudden fulfilment; the fragile emergence of new and innovative knowledge. Recent advancements in the areas of Knowledge/Innovation Management as well as Epistemology/Philosophy of Science provided further evidence for the validity of this structure. Furthermore, since it became clear that the third step (letting-go) unlocks an existential dimension, an ontological reflection got necessary and promising.
My first methodological step consisted in a synoptic analysis of this field to identify the general characteristics of innovative thinking processes, as outlined above. Using this framework  for the analysis of Heidegger's theory reveals equivalent concepts to the three steps of becoming aware "suspension", "redirection" and "letting-go". The “destruction” (Destruktion) which is directed towards the historical process of (inter-)subjective formation is comparable with the gesture of suspension. It releases oneself from commonplace, every-day solutions and opinions – in many cases prejudices. Thereby the thinking subject excavates traditional occlusions until a primordial givenness (facticity) is reached. Once the standardized ways of thinking are abandoned, an alternative choice of thinking about the world becomes necessary. This step, comparable to redirection, is called “resoluteness” (Entschlossenheit), denoting an intentional change from inauthentic to authentic being. The final transformation of letting-go is actually isomorphic to the first moment of Heidegger’s threefold concept of “releasment” (Gelassenheit). Interestingly, this existential level seems to be a compressed repetition of the whole process structure: letting – go, the release-event itself and letting-come. Going through this most fundamental level of transformation demands an existential surrendering to possible future horizons. Contrasting the observable process structure with Heidegger’s theory reveals marked similarities. Therefore it is reasonable to ask, how do Heidegger’s concepts form a coherent and meaningful whole?  
The leitmotif connecting Heidegger’s concepts of destruction, resoluteness and releasment is twofold in itself. The ontological possibility of contemplative-innovative thinking relies on the abandonment of subjectivity – will and representation. Therefore this process consists of a stepwise liberation from being a subject for the sake of attaining oneself. The difference between intellectual and existential realm (letting-go or releasment) rests upon the total discard of voluntary thinking in favour of a frank acceptance. The paradox that this step can never be taken intentionally is the gate which must be passed for successfully undergoing this process. The second aspect for the meaningful unity of this process arises out of the first – the structure of human existence itself. Since the meaning of human being takes place in the threefold structure of temporality – past, present and future – subjectivity is similiarly structured. Therefore, I conclude that suspension, redirection and letting-go are three aspects of liberation from subjectivity as a temporally meaningful being, or the being of meaningful temporality. Subjective present, past and future are suspended in favour of the contemplation in a “deeper” pre-senc(s)e and dwelling therein.

