... title: The Effects of Social Affiliation on Approach/Avoidance Responses Towards Social and Non-social Stimuli



Abstract

Although it is usually proposed that oxytocin affects social behavior, Harari-Dahan and Bernstein postulate that it may directly affect a general approach/avoidance system [1]. According to this hypothesis, oxytocin facilitates the approach towards positive social stimuli and attenuates avoidance of negative social stimuli. However, the authors claim that the same applies to non-social stimuli, as long as they are emotionally evocative and motivationally relevant for the person. Also, the presence of a socially affiliated person in a stressful situation has been repeatedly shown to have an anxiolytic effect and to decrease avoidance behaviors, while this effect may also be partly mediated by oxytocin [2]. If this assumption is correct, the induction of social affiliation might affect general approach/avoidance via the oxytonergic system.
The aim of this study is to test the effects of social affiliation on approach/avoidance towards social and non-social stimuli. Social affiliation will be induced by manipulating participants’ beliefs of how similar the mental states of another participant are to their own mental states. In the experimental group, similar responses to statements about mental states will prevail, while in the control group dissimilar responses will prevail. To measure approach/avoidance behavior, we will present participants with six categories of stimuli which vary on: valence (positive, negative or neutral) and content (social or non-social). Social and non-social stimuli will be taken from the IAPS database and matched for arousal and valence. Participants’ task will be to control how long each stimulus stays on the screen. Prolonging the stimulus presentation time is interpreted as an approach response, and shortening the stimulus presentation time as an avoidance response. Participants will complete this task both before and after the experimental/control manipulation, so that any individual differences in approach and avoidance behavior levels could be controlled for. In the end, participants will fill an anxiety sensitivity scale and an explicit measure of social affiliation.
We expect that the induction of social affiliation, compared to the control manipulation, will increase approach to positive social stimuli and decrease avoidance of negative social stimuli. The same is expected for the non-social, emotionally evocative stimuli. Following recent findings [1], we expect to induce a stronger decrease in avoidance of negative stimuli in participants who are more anxiety sensitive.

!!References
[1] O. Harari-Dahan and A. Bernstein. “Oxytocin attenuates social and non-social avoidance: Re-thinking the social specificity of Oxytocin”. Psychoendocrinology, vol. 81, pp 105-112, 2017.
[2] T. Kiksui, J.T. Winslow and Y. Mori. “Social buffering: relief from stress and anxiety”. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences, vol. 361(1476), pp 2215-2228, 2006.

