... title: !!!!Acquisition of Slovene Adjective Inflection and Semantics



Abstract

!!!!Acquisition of Slovene Adjective Inflection and Semantics



!!Besides grammatical descriptions, there was not much written about Slovene adjectives. The aim of our research was to investigate the parent-child input-output relations in the acquisition of adjectives in Slovene. We considered the hypothesis that in first language acquisition adjectives emerge later than nouns and verbs and that their use increases before age 3;0. We analysed the speech production and the input received by one Slovene girl from age 1;5 to 2;8. The material used for this analysis is based on theoretical assumptions in Petrič (2002), Dressler, Kilani-Schoch, Klampfer (2003), Korecky-Kröll and Dressler (2013) and on the empirical data, provided by the first author We described the formal aspects of Slovene adjectives, we presented and interpreted the acquisition data and analysed it from a morphological and syntactic perspective, looking also for the semantic and lexical relations (word fields, antonyms and synonyms). The predominant method of adjective acquisition was by repetition. At age 1;5–1;7 no adjectives were produced, since 1;8 only occasionally, since 2;0 more often, at 2;1 isolated inflected forms appeared, whereas at 2;8 we found a consistent amount of adequately used adjectives. This supports also the thesis that adjectives are produced later than nouns and verbs.

!!Key words: language, acquisition, development, adjectives, child's speech

!! References
(1) Petrič, T. 2002. Erstspracherwerb am Beispiel eines slowenischen Kindes – Parallelen im Erwerb des Slowenischen und Deutschen. In: Herwig, R. Sprache und die modernen Medien: Linguistik international 14.
(2) Dressler, W. U., Kilani-Schoch, M. and Klampfer. S. 2003. How does a child detect morphology? Evidence from production. In: Baayen, R. H. and Schreuder, R. Morphological 
(3)Korecky-Kröll, K. and Dressler, W. U. 2013. Acquisition of German adjective inflection and semantics by two Austrian children. This volume.

