... title: The neuro-cognitive basis and social manifestation of violence and compassion



Abstract

The social problem of violence recently considers the issue also from the neuroscientific view. Moreover, teo forms of behaviour such as cooperation and sompassion have similar bases in developmental, cognitive and cerebral regulation to the meschanisms which are activated also in violence, even though that they result in radically different way. [1] The aim of my project is to introduce violence- reduction mechanisms and provide understanding of the phenomenon of violence in the society with interdisciplinary analysis of the biological, cognitive and social factors that together form a human being in a holistic approach. The main research questions arise as Is it possible to avoid aggressive behavior through social learning, social information to develop compassionate and cooperative behavior?Can experience change brain structure and function? Could norms cognitively channel human emotional responses? Could we say that violence can exsist in a cognitive neurobiological way?
Firstly, I would like to stress a clarification between concepts and classification of aggression and violence. Aggression is a behavior that force to cause damage or threaten to cause it to the psysical or psychological integrity of another living being. One the other hand, the definition of aggresion is harmful behavior by individual towards another and we could identify it to the behaviour of different animal species. In other words, aggression could be understand on the basis of the adaptation. It differs in the animal studies as (i) intraspecies aggression (between individuals of the same species) or (ii) interspecies aggression (between different species).  Human aggression is defined as behaviour directed ar another individual with immediate intention of causing harm.[1] However, there could be a criteria problem of subjectivity of intention, which is known only through the aggresor's own recognition. However, violence is a type od social aggression which is penalized through legal sanction and societal norms. The creation of healthy physical envrionments promote the all-round development of society members, supported by empathic education that promotes understanding of other's situations. In cases of intermittent explosive disorder, some cases of epilepsy and even acquired socipathy, we have to bear in mind that many manifestations of aggression and violence are correlated to psychosocial context of inequality, but some of the also to organic disfuntions which could influence aggressive behavior. We could say that individual manifestations of human harm are also based on psychopathology as well on psychology and neuroscience. 

Due to ongoing experimental design only theoretical background is reported here. 

!!Reference
Mercadillo, R. E., & Arias, N. A. (2010). Violence and compassion: a bioethical insight into their cognitive bases and social manifestations. International social science journal, 61(200‐201), 221-232.

