... title: "Trust"



Abstract

>>Trust<<
                                      A psychological-sociological pilot study 
                                              professor Mirjana Ule
                                              assistant Andreja Zivonder
Introduction
I participated in a psychological-sociological pilot study, which studied the concept >>trust<< in a modern society. Trust becomes a more urgent and central concern in today's uncertain and global conditions (Misztal 1996: 9). It enables individuals to adapt to complex social environment, and benefit from increased opportunities (Earle and Cvetkovich 1995: 38). It is important to study this concept, because trust influences our decision making process. The results of the short survey on the students of the Faculty of Social Science in Ljubljana, Slovenia, showed that a mother has an essential role in trusting. A mother has a role in making a significant life decision in a student life. For example when a students is deciding whether or not accept a new job offer, they would usually go ask their mother for the advice or approval. Therefore, we were also going to investigate >>the mother<< phenomena.

Material and Methods
The pilot study was conducted in three phases. At first, we analyzed the concept >>trust<< theoretically, by collecting the material that has already been done by other researchers. We looked into already existing database in Slovenia. Next, we looked into qualitative studies that have been done in the United States. We analyzed its methods and results And lastly, we looked at the past results from the survey done on the students of the Faculty of Social Science. 
After doing all the theoretical research, we set up the ground for a qualitative research. This part is going to be done by the third year students at the Faculty of Social Science.They are going to organize two focus groups. Participants of one focus group is going to be only students and the other only mothers. They are going to analyze and discuss >>the mother<< phenomena in the concept of trust. The quantitative research is also going to be done, but after we get the result of the qualitative research. We are going to make a survey based on the two different scales. The first one is based on the Interpersonal Trust Scale, by Rotter, 1967. The second scale was done by the collection of other scales, created by professor Ule and her assistant. We are going to give this survey to many different faculties of the University of Ljubljana.

Results and Discussion
We do not have the results yet. However, we do have the results from the survey made on the class of the third year students at the Faculty of Social Science. Students got the scale described above. The results showed that they trust the important things (such as carrier) to their mother the most, but they trust other basic problems (such as boyfriend/girlfriend problems) to their friends the most. However, students do not trust the government, media, and the politicians. In this study we conducted all needed material for the quantitative research on the large sample. I am eager to analyze the future results. Not trusting to the >>unknown<< is a repetitive result. It is important to analyse it and understand it, so we can have a more promising future. 


References 
Rotter, J. B. (1967). Interpersonal Trust Scale. 
Sztompka, P. (1999). Trust. A sociologial thoery. Cambridge: University Press.
Ule, M. (2009). Socialna Psihologija. Analiticni pristop k zivljenju v druzbi. Ljubljana: FDV.

