... title: Power and Morality



Abstract

Power is a key component which structures our society. It can be found in almost all social relationships and is therefore important in many fields, such as politics, economics, psychology or sociology. Much of our actions are influenced by the dependence, independence or interdependence on others. Often power, which can be understood as “having the discretion and the means to asymmetrically enforce one’s will over others”, is associative with negative behavior [1]. It could be shown that power has a positive effect on corruption and engagement in unethical behavior [2]. Which factors can moderate this relationship is still an open question. In the ethical decision making literature moral intensity is a recently discovered construct, which affects the whole decision making process.  Moral intensity is the “extent of issue-related moral imperative in a situation and consists of several dimensions [3]. This line of research focuses on the ethical issue itself and its consequences on the decision-making process. It is reasonable to assume, that the decision making process is different for reporting your colleague to your supervisor, if you saw him stealing a pen or if you observed sexual harassment. How moral intensity influences the powerful is still unclear. My thesis wants to answer this question and my research question is: Which factors can moderate the relationship between power and ethical decision making and how does moral intensity influence the decision making process? To answer this question an experiment will be conducted and it is expected that the intensity has a greater influence on the powerless than on the powerful. Powerful people are less likely to obey social rules. Therefore, they can more easily ignore the social pressure which results of moral intensity and are able to resist. In contrast powerless people are more dependent on others and therefore are more likely to follow social rules. The consequence is that no matter what the moral issue itself is, powerful people are more likely to engage in corruptive behavior than powerless people.
!!References
[1] Sturm, R. E., & Antonakis, J. “Interpersonal power: A review, critique, and research agenda”. Journal of Management, 2015, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 136-163.
[2] Lammers, J., Galinsky, A. D., Dubois, D., & Rucker, D. D. “Power and morality”. Current Opinion in Psychology, 2015, vol. 6, pp.15-19.
[3]Lehnert, K., Park, Y. H., & Singh, N. “Research note and review of the empirical ethical decision-making literature: Boundary conditions and extensions”. Journal of Business Ethics, 2015 vol. 129, no.1, pp.195-219.

