... title: Cognitive Aspects of Designing Rule Based Dialogue Guidance in Educational Mathematical Assistant



Abstract

The following thesis tries to relate the potential of an upcoming new generation of Theory-Prover based educational mathematics assistants with the potential of cognitive science, and also to meet the challenge to design a cognitive-friendly learning environment/dialogue system that is compatible with how the human mind actually works. The focus of the development is on a concrete case: simplification fraction in algebra.

We work with the education software ISAC, an educational mathematics assistant based on Lucas-Interpretation (LIP). LIP supports step-wise solving mathematics problems in science and technology by "next-step-guidance" (NSG),where the system can provide the next step. This is a novel technology developed at TU Graz and RISC Linz, indicates potential to proceed from reactive to active systems. Reactive systems are: Mechanized mathematics assistants (MMAs), Computer Algebra Systems (CAS) and Dynamic Geometry Systems: where the user provides input, and the system reacts with an output. This kind of behavior carried over to educational MMAs so far. Active systems provide more possibility for interaction with the computer. Designing the dialogue system based on cognitive aspects is a complex task, there are questions and aspects to be taken into consideration: how to provide individual answers (in a face-to face human teaching process, the teacher is able to provide individual answers for different students), how to deal with the social aspect of learning. The goal of the dialogue system is not to solve the mathematical task in the dialogue process, but guide the learner through the learning process, supporting individual learning strategies with showing strategies, hints, patterns.
To build a dialogue system first we have to identify the human way of thinking, the innate processes in mathematics, and try to answer how could we support the mathematical learning process in a computer based education scenario, like in the next-step-guidance system, ISAC. Understanding the thinking involved in the learning and doing mathematics, especially understanding abstraction is a key aspect to build education software.
Cognitive science is relatively new in the field of mathematics education. It claims, that mathematics is a stable product of adaptive human activities, developed through centuries, largely happening at unconsciouses level. Human, as also animals share some innate arithmetic, for example comparing small numbers, and many ideas are theoratized to be metaphoric (Nunez, 2010). However, mathematics is a human-made system based on our biological and bodily experiences, the ability to switch between different abstractions, and representations seems to be key in the learning process. Because of the above reasons, while designing the dialogue-system we focus on the followings: supporting individual learning and multiple representations, mathematics is fallible, and learning happens through trials and errors. The second part of the thesis deals with the concrete implementation of the dialogue system. The goal of this part is to find out if working with pre-defined error patterns is supported by the computer software ISAC, and if using them helps the learning learning process.
However, connected to misconceptions the notion of error patterns is not new in mathematical education, we define them only as typical sets of errors, using for different system responses.
Providing solution strategies, or hints to solve the problem, and also presenting parts of the next step to the learner is a also new insight. Mathematics is partly cultural, and influenced by the language, supporting individual way of thinking with multiple strategies (in our concrete case with reacting on error patterns, giving hints) is a very important point, because each learner has a different knowledge level, and different experiences. We try to support individual way of thinking with multiple strategies by accepting all correct answers to the step in the problem class. Learners possess different knowledge level, this is supported for all steps in calculations within a selected problem class. For example fraction belong to algebra, and are number made up of other numbers. Simplifying fraction might be a difficult problem for the learners, and can have different representations: division, proportion, simple number. Secondly we try to support, that human cognitive system, and also mathematics knowledge is fallible and learning happens partly through trials and errors, also by patterns, with responding group of predefined error patterns. Open question of the thesis is how we can support the bodily based learning process.
As an implication cognitive science successfully derives practical advice for the design of learning scenarios, also for mathematics, and also plays a prominent role in the design of educational software. Later, based on this work, it would be also possible to create user-models, and develop a more effective dialogue system between learner and computer. Developing and designing the concrete dialogue system in ISAC involves computer science and rule based-system, focusing on interdisciplinary aspect, connecting human cognition with concrete computer application in a real time human-computer interaction. However, realizing embodiment is the question of future, using a computer software in education just enables the possibility to response at individual learning strategies.


References

[1] Alan Krempler and Walther Neuper. Formative assessment for user guidance in single stepping systems. In Michael E. Aucher, editor, Interactive Compute Aided Learning, Proceedings of ICL08, Villach, Austria, 2008.
[2] Juhani Tuovinen John Sweller Slava Kalyuga, Paul Chandler. When problem solving is superior to studying worked examples. Journal of Educational Psychology,93(3):579–588, 2001.
[3] Núñez R. (2007). The Cognitive Science of Mathematics: Why is it relevant for Mathematics Education? In R. Lesh, E. Hamilton, & J. Kaput (Eds.), Foundations for the Future in Mathematics Education (pp. 127-154). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

