... title: Learning effects in the simulation based learning experience: Reckon&Choose



Abstract

The project aims to analyse the learning effects of the simulation-based learning environment Reckon&Choose. The simulation is designed as part of the L4S Learning for Security EU project for crisis situation, where the overall goal is to develop potential tools to supports and help people to learn the necessary soft skills for effective crisis management. In the beginning of the development, several, for crisis situation relevant learning goals (attitudes, knowledge, skills), and sub-goals were defined on individual, team, inter-intra organisational level. Reckon&Choose provides an authentic problem-based learning environment. It simulates an air plane accident in an imaginary airport. It is played by three ideal-typical roles, who share one computer, and have to solve/play a crisis situation in a collaborative way. The simulation addresses concrete problems in information management, decision making, collaboration, and individual response to crisis situation.
During my semester work, I was involved in the authoring process of the simulation, (how to design the story scenario in a way that participants face the information management problems occurring during crisis situation). I participated in the last pilot session in Vienna, and  my tasks is also to analyse the learning effects of the simulation.  The research question of my project are: What can people learn from the game? What are the key aspects of learning? Is the simulation an effective learning tool? 
The learning effect depends partly on the good connection between reality and simulation (Kriz, 2010), because simulations create experiences related to the specific topic. However, a crisis is a very complex situation, in the scenario validation, and feedback on learning experience from the first pilot sessions participants usually found the game involving, enjoyed the play and found the scenario realistic. Participants were technical expertise, non experts, high/low expertise in crisis management. Evaluation methods were questionnaires with open ended and multiple choice questions.
Experience alone is not always enough for a learning effect to occur; debriefing with a facilitator highly influences the outcome (Crookall, 2010). Participants of pilot sessions reported also a need for debriefing, a reflection to their own performance.  During the simulation participants, especially students and non-experts, reported to face the information management problem through conflicting, missing or hidden information and information overload. Regarding the individual emotional aspect, the usual reaction mentioned in the evaluation reports was stress due to information overload.
Usually simulation games are said to be potential learning tools, but learning is still a very individual experience with subjective learning styles, and is influenced by many different factors:like in the simulation too: the way of teaching, the previous knowledge of the participants, the evolving group dynamics, which should also to be examined in the simulation Reckon&Choose. Important conclusion from the simulation for the participants might be, that they continue making decisions, document the pros and cons, and remain active in a crisis situation, despite the incomplete information, and the unexpected negative consequences.

[1] 4s.fvaweb.eu/KB/DocsEC/L4S-D3.1_Framework_Simulation_Scenarios_and_Design.pdf, 2011
[2] Kriz C. W., 2010: A systemic-constructivist approach to the facilitation and debriefing of simulations and games: Journal of Games and Simulation 41 663, 2010
[3] Crookall D.: Serious Games, Debriefing, and Simulation/Gaming as a Disciplin Journal of
Games and Simulation 41. 898, 2010

