... title: Can be emotional experience (emotional judgment) the same as moral judgment?



Abstract

!!!Can be emotional experience (emotional judgment) the same as moral judgment?

Emotions are sometimes seen as a threat to the morality and the rationality, even though there is probably closer to us the romantic idea of emotions as the center of human individuality and morality. In both of these approaches there is obvious division of emotions and reason. My work is focused on eliminating this view of exclusion. I would like to present the view, that if we can talk about emotions and reason as two entities, both together must form a system of evaluation that is needed for best possible motor (or mental) responses to any stimuli.
On this system of evaluation also system of moral judgment is based. Moral judgment was often undividedly connected to reason and wisdom. I am researching the relation between moral judgment and emotional experience in search for possible sameness. 
I argue, that there is a point of view, from which moral judgment and emotional experience cannot be the same. But there is also another point of view, I will present, from which they can even be the same. 
In master thesis, which deals with the reflection on the emotions, judgment as decision-making, reason, morality and similar glib terms, a major part of the work is devoted to the precise definitions of these terms. Terms definitions are under section of various and already confirmed empirical evidences, scientifically defined by various authors and personal feelings, based on phenomenological embodied internal activity. And so, for example, I will search for the meaning of term reason from Kant's Pure Reason to the other side – to reason as a capacity of embodied cognition to decide which reaction to choose in connection with some stimuli. Because of the nature of the language, in different contexts we are many times forced to use the same word for expressing different meanings. In search for definitions I will also include some non-scientific results of internet’s forums, social sites and other web sources search on this topic and on the meaning of those terms.
Because a big part of my career as a lawyer was devoted to the field of  psychiatry and in recent years to human rights I like to examine the junction between morality, embodied cognition as being and law. Although I will expose the interpretation of possible conflicts between emotional judgment and moral judgment as conflicts between two different judgments, which can be result of the same process of evaluation, I try to focus on the process of evaluation itself. 
In law, there are many implicit presumptions that moral judgment cannot be the same as emotional judgment. Also in a process of a legal decision making emotions are seen mainly as a disturbance. So, my thesis’s  findings can also importantly contribute to the field of law and human rights. 
My research question is therefore: Can an emotional experience (judgment) and a moral judgment be the same?
The answers to the questions I will be searching through the analysis and synthesis of mainly three  works on which the thesis is based (Bortolotti(1), Damasio(2), Nussbaum(3)),  as well as analysis and synthesis of all facts, emotions and feelings experienced during cognitive science studies.  
My master thesis is theoretical and my main method is philosophical analysis as chimera to lawyer’s logical system. Philosophical analysis today in examination of the issues related to emotions, reason and morality can no longer rely solely on the analysis of the language so it should be even more strongly connecting with other findings of science. That’s why in my work I also relay on scientific knowledge in the fields of neuroscience and cognitive psychology. I also try to develop some thoughts with the help of the knowledge of the basic mechanisms of genetics, taking into account the findings of the genes which predetermine emotional tendency. 

!!References
[1] Lisa Bortolotti, »Does reflection lead to wise choices?,« in Philosophical Explorations: An International Journal for the Philosophy of Mind and Action, 2011, 14:3, pp. 297-313 
[2] Antonio Damasio, Descartes' Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain, New York, Penguin Books, 2006
[3] Martha C. Nussbaum, Upheavals of thought: The intelligence of emotion, 8th ed. New York, Cambridge University Press, 2008

