... title: Placebo Effect Triggers and Their Possible Merit in Effectiveness of Complementary and Alternative Medicine Practices



Abstract

!!!! Placebo Effect Triggers and Their Possible Merit in Effectiveness of Complementary and Alternative Medicine Practices

Contrary to Evidence-Based Medicine (EBM), Complementary and Alternative Medicine (CAM) is any practice that supposedly exhibits healing effect, yet claims are not based on scientific evidence. Main idea on which the most CAM practices are grounded is the concept of innate self-heal capacity. Controversial as it may sound and unproven as it can be, popularity of alternative methods is on the rise. According to the research carried out in 2011 in Austria, 46% of participants had at least one experience regarding the complementary medicine, whereas 91% of them were satisfied with the treatment. Homeopathy, as one of the most popular practices, has around 500 million users according to the World Health Organization. Although scientifically valid evidence of efficacy might be missing, profound number of users worldwide is evidence per se that should not be disregarded.

Expectation, belief, trust, hope and suggestibility are some of the fundamental properties cultivated in CAM practices. As our understanding of the placebo effect and its mechanisms expanded, it became clear that the already mentioned properties are also the influential factors of the placebo effect itself, and its manipulation [1]. Placebo effect is not only observable on the level of patient’s subjectivity, but on the physiological level as well. As it is already known, there is no a single mechanism for the placebo effect. Rather, there are many [2]. Those mechanisms recruit different brain regions and circuits, depending on the placebo being administered. Crucial question that arises is how an inert substance, by being contextualized, has such a profound effect on the body.

Objectives: 1. Systematical description of possible cognitive and emotional processes that could be involved in the initial phase of the placebo administration (phase preceding placebo-specific physiological changes); 2. Through the systematic literature research, aim is to determine the possible correlation between the efficacy of selected CAM practices and psychological mechanisms involved in the initial phase of placebo effect, i.e. whether same mechanisms could be involved in triggering the healing process.

References:
[1]      F. Benedetti, “Drugs and placebos: what’s the difference?,” EMBO Rep., 2014.

[2]      D. G. Finniss, T. J. Kaptchuk, F. Miller, and F. Benedetti, “Biological, clinical, and ethical advances of placebo effects,” The Lancet, vol. 375, no. 9715. pp. 686–695, 2010.

