... title: An Electroencephalography Study on Neural Correlates in Restorative Yoga and Mindfulness Meditation



Abstract

Restorative yoga is a very gentle type of yoga and an active relaxation. It makes use of props (blankets, bolsters, straps, blocks, weights, chairs, eye pillows etc.) to create positions of ease and comfort that facilitate relaxation and health. This type of yoga is highly suitable in psychosomatic, stress related issues and can offer a great balance against invasive procedures and discomfort that patients go during their treatments[1]. Mindfulness meditation practice is done eyes gently closed, sitting position, legs crossed with a straight spine while the attention is placed on breathing in and out. While meditating the individual is focused upon her or his breathing, and when thoughts emerge, the meditator returns focusing on the object of meditation, breathing. Research has found that mindfulness meditation can reduce depression, anxiety and perceived distress. John Kabat-Zinn in one of the main influencers for Mindfulness meditation in the West. In 1979 he developed a Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction program (MBSR) at the University of Massachusetts Medical School. This type of a program has been used in many hospitals and health clinics in the past decades [2]. We will be comparing a restorative yoga group to mindfulness meditation group in beginners with 7 different questionnaires and the EEG (electroencephalography) method. Subjects will have no prior experience on restorative yoga or in mindfulness meditation or any other type of meditation. The study will focus on detecting the presence of theta rhythms in the brain while performing mindfulness meditation and restorative yoga. Specifically, we are curious to see whether there is a difference in attaining the theta state between restorative yoga group and mindfulness meditation group.

[1] J.H.Lasater. Restore and Rebalance: Yoga for Deep Relaxation. Shambala Publications, 2017.
[2] J.Kabat-Zinn. Wherever you go, there you are: Mindfulness meditation in everyday life. Hachetter Books, 2009.

