... title: Ethics in Contemporary Mindfulness: Exploring the Transformative Power of Implicit Ethical Teachings



Abstract

Through the introduction of mindfulness into the West, the practice has been radically recontextualized and thereby, so the criticism, deprived of its potential to transform practitioners on an existential level. Extracted from the Buddhist framework to be utilized in secular clinical and therapeutic settings, mindfulness has been integrated into a substantially distinct system of beliefs and values, which is arguably not fit to provide it with the same kind of guidance and purpose – e.g., [1].
Critics are especially concerned about the omission of explicit ethics teachings in modern mindfulness programs – e.g., [2]. Yet, while arguments for augmenting mindfulness with an ethical dimension are cogent – especially in consideration of some specific applications as in military training or corporate settings –, the claim for the teachings to be explicit remains debatable. Indeed, this postulation rests on a typical Western conception of ethics, which is one of abstraction and formalization. There are, however, alternative, more practical approaches to ethics that conceive of it as a method of training rather than an intellectual study. These notably include Varela [3] and his notion of ‘ethical know-how’. Drawing upon recent insights from cognitive science, he suggests that ethical understanding and behavior are rather embodied and enacted. Such understanding of ethics supports the idea that ethical development is not dependent on explicit teachings but may well be elicited through implicit teaching elements.
There is little research yet on the actuality and potential of implicit ethics teachings in the context of contemporary mindfulness. With my thesis, I seek to take a step towards filling this research gap. Specifically, my goal is to identify implicit (and explicit) teaching elements in modern mindfulness programs and assess their effectiveness in eliciting ethical development in practitioners. The concepts of ethics and ethical development, as employed here, denote virtues as manifest in one’s character and conduct and the cultivation thereof.
Since the project is still in the planning phase, the exact methodology is yet to be determined. To allow for an in-depth exploration of the topic, a mixed methods approach, such as a combination of qualitative and quantitative measures and ethnographic observation, may be worthwhile.
Insights into the effectiveness of implicit forms of teaching are not only valuable in the context of contemporary mindfulness but can also be useful in many other areas.

[1] S. Vörös, “Sitting with the demons – mindfulness, suffering, and existential transformation,” Asian Studies, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 59-83, 2016.
[2] R. E. Purser and D. Loy, “Beyond McMindfulness,” Huffington Post, January 7, 2013. [Online], Available: https://www.huffingtonpost.com/ron-purser/beyond-mcmindfulness_b_3519289.html. [Accessed May 10, 2018]
[3] F. J. Varela, Ethical Know-How: Action Wisdom, and Cognition. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1999.

