... title: The Neuroimaging of Social Anxiety Disorder



Abstract

Social anxiety disorder, or social phobia, is characterised by extreme emotional distress in social situations, caused by low self-esteem and the fear of being judged and criticised by other, often unfamiliar, people. Among the physical symptoms are blushing, sweating, heart racing, trembling, persistent nervousness, dizziness, nausea, and even panic attacks. Although individuals often recognise that the fear is unreasonable or excessive, they find it difficult to cope with it and tend to avoid feared situations, which can have great impact on their social activities and relationships, as well as on their normal personal routine, health, and occupational choice. 
Nowadays, SAD is considered the third largest psychiatric health problem worldwide, after depression and alcohol dependence (according to the American Psychiatric Association, 2000). Interestingly, it was not until 1980 that SAD was first officially recognised as a psychiatric condition [2]. Beforehand, other terms were used, such as social neurosis to describe extreme shyness. In some cases, social phobia was even mistakenly diagnosed as schizophrenia, for instance. In fact, SAD is comorbid with a number of other psychiatric conditions like depression, substance abuse or obsessive compulsive disorder and the diagnosis poses some problems. 
The current master thesis project aims at addressing SAD as a complex and multi-facetted phenomenon that encompasses different approaches from various disciplines. The first part of the thesis will trace back how social anxiety has evolved, by engaging different views from the fields of philosophy, comparative biology, anthropology, neurobiology, psychology, and psychiatry. The second part will provide an introduction into the methodology of fMRI, which will pave the way to the last part of the thesis, focusing on an fMRI study conducted with SAD patients and healthy controls. The study will apply a modified emotional Stroop test similar to the one used by Blair and colleagues [1]. For the purpose of the current study, pictures of harsh and neutral faces will be used to test the hypothesis that amygdala is hyperactive during perception of angry faces, irrespective of attentional load in SAD patients relative to healthy participants [3]. Furthermore, the fMRI study will focus on the functional connectivity between the amygdala and other brain regions, suggesting a decreased prefrontal down-regulation during situations inducing social anxiety.  
The overall objective of the thesis is to unify different views into one interdisciplinary model of social anxiety and put the theoretical considerations into practice within the scope of the experimental fMRI study. Furthermore, the fMRI study will consider the functional connectivity between the amygdala and other brain regions in order to validate a neurobiological network hypothesis of SAD. 

References:
[1] Blair, K., Smith, B., Mitchell, D., Morton, J., Vythilingam, M., Pessoa, L., et al. (2007). Modulation of emotion by cognition and cognition by emotion. NeuroImage, 35(1), 430–440.
[2] Kashdan, T. B., & McKnight, P. E. (2010). The Darker Side of Social Anxiety: When Aggressive Impulsivity Prevails Over Shy Inhibition. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 19(1), 47–50.
[3] Phan, K. L., Fitzgerald, D. A., Nathan, P. J., & Tancer, M. E. (2006). Association between Amygdala Hyperactivity to Harsh Faces and Severity of Social Anxiety in Generalized Social Phobia. Biological Psychiatry, 59(5), 424–429.

