... title: !!!! The Intuitive Mode: Being Guided Towards The New



Abstract

!!!! The Intuitive Mode: Being Guided Towards The New

The emergence of new knowledge is often associated with intuition. Researchers report that they have been guided towards insights and discoveries by hunches that appeared without conscious reasoning. Some artists claim that the act of creation is characterized by intuitive guidance in which they are manifesting knowledge that emerges from a non-conscious source. [1]
Within the research project the phenomenon of being in a mode of intuitive guidance in the context of knowledge creation is investigated.

Research was conducted on the basis of literature on intuition in the domains of psychology and philosophy, as well as on accounts of subjects experiencing the intuitive mode.
Conceptualizations of intuition were identified and summarized. Holistic intuition, as described by C.G. Jung and Jerome Bruner, is characterized by the integration of multiple cues without conscious awareness or explicit rules. Due to the formation of new knowledge it seems to provide a common ground for examining the intuitive mode.

A definition of the intuitive mode is introduced along with conditions for its arising. It is determined by an episode of hunches -being consciously aware- that guide the subject towards the manifestation of new knowledge; the scientist towards an insight or a discovery, the artist towards the act of creation.
It gets active when one is in immediate contact with an object, meaning that no expectations or schemes are applied on whatever is about to emerge. Furthermore, it pursues the quest of one’s will; e.g., the artist having the explicit will to come up with a painting or a piece of music.

In the next step, research on related mechanisms was conducted. The Unconscious Thought Theory stands in favour of holistic intuition and is closely related to the intuitive mode; information is processed in the unconsciousness on behalf of one’s will whereby the resulting outcomes are conscious hunches. [2] 

Finally, the intuitive mode was related to similar concepts of cognitive modes. 
Although sharing several features, the Flow-Effect by Csikszentmihalyi differentiates in its purpose; specific goals and constant feedback are required, thus hindering the emergence of new knowledge.
Presence by Otto Scharmer, and Mindfulness Meditation have an enhancing effect on the intuitive mode; one does not apply any cognitive schemes on structures, but directs attention in a judgeless manner to whatever is about to emerge.  

Little research is done on the intuitive mode. Basic investigation of how or when it arises may reveal pioneering results for further research. 
Furthermore, it is worthwhile to investigate the impact of talent or giftedness on the likelihood of experiencing the mode. 


!! References  

[1] K. Bowers et al. “Intuition in the Context of Discovery,” Cognitive Psychology, vol. 22, pp. 72-110, 1990.

[2] A. Dijksterhuis, L. Nordgren. “A Theory of Unconscious Thought,” Perspectives on Psychological Science, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 95-109, 2006.

[3] M. Sinclair. “Misconceptions about intuition,” Psychological Inquiry: An International Journal for the Advancement of Psychological Inquiry, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 378-386, 2010.

