... title: Cognitive structures responsible for movement of a flock



Abstract

In our work we focus on modelling of bird flight and in group of individuals on emergent distributed flocks. On the one hand we are trying to show what kind of problems and roughly in what extent could be described by traditional rule-based approaches, on the other hand we propose another kind of approach which could bring some novelty into the research.
The starting point of our work comes from widely known rule-based model of Craig Reynolds called Boids, which considers individual as something that can fly and change speed or direction just by order. That means in principle there is no flight, just ability to move body through 3D space. This model is based on three partial behaviours each individual applies. Each of these rules is defined upon actual state of other bird bodies in close neighbourhood specified by radius. The first of these rules represents the tendency to avoid situations of being too close to other individuals. This partial behaviour is usually called separation. The second of them, which we usually call alignment, represents the tendency to keep the same heading as other individuals. The third rule called cohesion represents some kind of counter-behaviour to the first one and makes individual to stay close to his neighbours. Good tool for implementation of this kind of model is NetLogo, which we used. We modified existing 3D simulation distributed with this tool as exemplary. This model specifies individual by its position and velocity vector. Each of partial behaviours produces partial acceleration vector and sum of all partial acceleration vectors gives total acceleration vector, which includes change of speed and heading. We kept this logic and the basis of the model. We changed the weights of partial behaviours (how much particular tendency affects the final behaviour) and also added another partial behaviours producing partial vectors. The original flocks seemed to have characteristics more typical for fish schools, because they have been too much aligned. Therefore we decreased mainly the weight of aligning partial behaviour. Most important rules we added were the gravitation rule, which is constantly downward and ground and sky avoidance, which served as tendency to avoid ground and too big heights. Closer to the ground individual is, bigger the weight of avoidance is (similarly in case of big heights). After these modifications flocks became more like that of birds (specifically cluster-like flocks typical for starlings).
We made also some research into one very specific kind of flocks called V-formations, which are characteristic mostly for migratory birds like geese, ducks or several species of swans (also discussed in [1]). The migratory flights of these birds are often thousands kilometres long and they fly often two weeks without single stop (probably longest noticed migratory non-stop flight is the flight of Bar-tailed Godwits from Alaska to New Zealand and Eastern Australia that means about 11000 km). There raise questions like "when they sleep?" or "do they even need to sleep?" We can almost only guess what the answers for these questions are. But still there are few clues making sense when linked together. We are sure they need to fly effectively and with strong energy economy. So if there is some reduced state of consciousness during their migratory flight it should be the first of aspects making their flight more energetically economic. If the way how formation they fly in is built up is possible to describe with some simple rules, then working simulation utilizing such rules would give us a good reason to believe, that there is some kind of autopilot-like state of their mind (we expect that performing simple rules require only small brain activity). This state of mind could be more or less equivalent to the sleep. On the other hand, the shape of V needs more rules than line, but maybe the step from line to shape of V was simply done by evolution utilizing aerodynamic aspects. We tried to find simple rules for V-formation by modelling in NetLogo again using same position, velocity and acceleration vector principles from original flocking simulation as starting point. We reduced the simulation into 2D because we consider the height as not very important for this problem. Our hypotheses are that there is autopilot-like state of mind (represented by rule-based paradigm of modelling), and that advantage of aerodynamic uplift and obscured vision discomfort (when individual are in line formation they minimize the obscuration of each other's visual fields) play the role in process of forming a V-formation. In our model aerodynamic aspects have been implemented as partial acceleration vector towards special position behind closest neighbour in frontal visual field. Aspects of vision have been implemented as partial acceleration vector towards position, in which two closest neighbours in front part of visual field of individual are lined-up. But it seems there are other conditions that need to be satisfied to make it work. Accelerations shouldn't be too big and also some stabilization of heading is needed (rules for alignment, common long distance goal, ...) to increase chance of convergence of the system. With mentioned rules we simulated formations very similar to those we can observe in nature. However they are often asymmetric and have different kinds of substructures, V-formations observed in nature also do not satisfy our concept of perfect V many times.
Finally, we decided to focus much more on how the individual performs the flight (mainly supported by [3]) and how its internal modular cognitive structures (responsible for its abilities) could be defined. Emphasizing focus on movement abilities of individual could give us better insight into the way how flocks could and how they probably does not form (there could exist some important movement restriction flock models did not considered until now). As the real birds fly by interaction with the real physical environment we also needed to simulate the interaction of body with environment, which leads to some position and heading change. We implemented our own physical simulation environment fitted for our definition of body of individual. Body of our individual consists of four parts: left wing, right wing, tail and torso. Body comes to interaction with three for us important forces: gravitational force (body as a whole), air resistance (sum of air resistance at each part of body) and force produced by body (only wings). The mind is separated from the body and causes changes of some values specifying state of body like orientation of wings and tail and determinig the force wings produce by flapping. What mind cannot affect directly is the position and orientation of its body. We built-up mind of individual from different modules thinking in terms of subsumption architecture (R. Brooks), which we implemented utilizing agent-space architecture on agent oriented programming paradigm [2]. That means we have been thinking in layers of behaviour starting from simple ability and then adding new layers representing new abilities (or behaviours). Each module runs separately and is responsible only for a part of a whole behaviour. We created the layer responsible for forward flight first, which consist of few modules making the individual fly without any yaw rotation and change from flapping to gliding when too high or reversly when too low. Individual module detects and gives the information about the height and other modules utilise it to change the state of body to make or stop flapping. This way we were able to construct cognitive structure, which is able to fly individually towards a goal. However the maneuverability is not very well handled yet, we have opened new perspective into modelling the groups of individuals we intend to continue in our next work. If crucial problems of maneuverability will be handled enough, it seems there also comes a big potential of emergence of new aspects in modelling of flocks, formations and other phenomenons in bird flight. Our work goes hand by hand with works of biologists and gives also some space for questions from such disciplines as psychology, neuroscience (relevance of used structures and character of modularity in comparison to brain) and philosophy (problem of body and mind).

References:

[1] LEBAR BAJEC, I., HEPPNER, F. H. Organized flight in birds. In Animal Behaviour, 78(4), 2009, pp. 777-789

[2] LUCNY, A. Building Intelligent Systems with Agent-Space Architecture. PhD Thesis, Faculty of Mathematics, Physics and Informatics, Comenius University, Bratislava, 2004

[3] PENNYCUICK, C. J. Modelling the Flying Bird. Academic Press, Amsterdam, Boston, Heidelberg, London, New York, Oxford, Paris, San Diego, San Francisco, Singapore, Sydney, Tokyo, 2008

