... title: Modelling Early Sensorimotor Development with Intrinsic Motivation



Abstract

!!Motivation

Early human sensorimotor development has been observed and is believed to be
quite well described, for instance by the constructivists [1]. In Piaget's theory of
Cognitive and Affective Development, the infant's capabilities and internal schemas
are documented and explained at various substages of their sensorimotor phase.
There has been a variety of approaches for computational modelling of the topic,
ranging from traditional cognitivist, such as the Sensorimotor Schemas [2],
to more data grounded emergent systems. We chose to explore a particular embodied
model - one based on a curiosity drive and active exploration of the world.

!!Model

Intelligent Adaptive Curiosity (IAC) is a learning system simulating an autonomous
robot [3]. The IAC is curious, being driven by internal reward derived from
achieved learning progress - getting better at predictions.
As a side effect, it seeks novel experiences, but also is careful and avoids
completely unknown, thus potentially dangerous, situations. Having no prior
knowledge of the world, the robot learns to act and to predict only via interaction.

In a complex world, it becomes unwieldy for a single monolithic learning system to
handle everything. As the size of observed data grows, IAC organizes itself to
better reflect parts of the world, developing experts for classes of situations.
This organization then also allows for maximizing learning progress by letting
the robot focus on the most salient task.

!!Results

We implemented the IAC algorithm (using the scientific Python stack) and benchmarked
it on multiple virtual environments (a blind BatCat playing with a toy, or a robot trying to locate its docking platform).
It actively explored the world, switching to more complex endeavours once the simple ones
were understood, confirming the results of Oudeyer et. al.
The most important task remains ahead: to fit IAC in the real world robot and reveal, whether its organizational mechanisms are enough to
abstract away low level sensorimotor interactions, and produce similar behavior
as the infants in Piaget's sensorimotor stage.

!!Acknowledgements

I wish to thank RNDr. Martin Takáč, PhD. for his utmost support,
encouragement, and the insights on the topic he provided.

!!References

[1] Wadsworth, Barry J. Piaget's theory of cognitive and affective development: Foundations of constructivism . Longman Publishing, 1996.

[2] Drescher, Gary L. Made-up minds: a constructivist approach to artificial intelligence. MIT press, 1991.

[3] Oudeyer, P-Y., Frédéric Kaplan, and Verena Vanessa Hafner. "Intrinsic motivation systems for autonomous mental development." Evolutionary Computation, IEEE Transactions on 11.2 (2007): 265-286.

