... title: Approaching user experience: moving between abstract and in-depth



Abstract

In Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) the focus has been traditionally on performance and functionality, called usability. Only recently the concept of user satisfaction has been brought from a mere addition to usability into the centre of the focus. It has been transformed into the notion of user experience, which comprises more than user satisfaction. This opened up a new strand of HCI research. This strand is not well defined yet and under rapid development. Despite discussions whether user experience encloses usability or vice versa (“old wine in new bottles”) or criticising engineering as still clinging to functionalism there is also a vivid discussion in progress how to approach the design for or the evaluation of user experience. Or to put it differently, how the phenomenon should be researched. There are at least two approaches that are competing and are viewed by their proponents as more or less opposing. One philosophy of thought is based on cognitive psychology and tries to model (abstract) user experience. The other one is based on phenomenology and ethnography and uses descriptive and dialogical (in-depth) methods. Although some (e.g. [3]) emphasize the need for a unified view in researching user experience there is no method yet that would provide such a view. The question remains open if it would be desirable to have one.

In the abstract approach considered here Marc Hassenzahl [2] uses James Russell’s account on emotional experience, hierarchical goals and related action theories to develop his own model of user experience, which allows the classification of product attributes on a hedonic (emotional) and pragmatic (task-oriented) dimension. For his account Hassenzahl stays heavily grounded in psychological research and its methods while also hinting at a possible extension with in-depth approaches. In their (competing) in-depth approach Peter Wright and John McCarthy [1] use John Dewey's pragmatist philosophy of experience and Mikhail Bakhtin's account of dialogue as grounding to develop their approach towards experience centred design, which emphasizes rich descriptions and dialogue between users and designers. Both accounts start from the same premise. That is, it is not enough to focus on performance only. This is basically what usability did so far. Furthermore, user experience is not very different from experience in general. Admittedly, this is not so difficult to agree on. Then they go on and develop quite different approaches, although there is overlap. On its own each method has issues in terms of applicability, validity and reliability. For example, the in-depth approach is hard to grasp and difficult to use in practice. There are problems with repeating studies and experiments and generalizing results or in other words, problems with reliability. On the other hand, the abstract approach tries to model user experience and can therefore be questioned in terms of validity or if the phenomenon is correctly measured.

The aim of this thesis is to use two methods, abstract and in-depth, to evaluate user experience for a specific interactive technology (a web based real estate search engine). The results of this evaluation study are to be discussed and compared from methodological, epistemological and application viewpoints. Sometimes both philosophies of thought are already implicitly and in parts used together in the design process. Despite that, I am not aware of a review on complementary use of the two approaches. I believe that it is possible to use both together, the level and degree of possible overlap has to be explicated. Both approaches could complement each other in such a way that the individual weaknesses are covered. In other words, does the combination of both approaches add additional value to the evaluation compared to the usage of only one? However, one has to be careful here. It is not clear if a combined method is fruitful, that means if it is beneficial and practical. In addition, there are also some epistemological problems. Two different bodies of knowledge are used together, so one has to be careful which conclusions to draw from this combined use. Furthermore, both philosophies of thought are characterized by a certain attitude or position towards doing science. Here the question is if this attitude is inherent in the method or if the methods can be used together with the same attitude.

The specific methodology for the evaluation study has still to be devised. It will consist of experience sampling, interviews and questionnaires. Participants have to be selected carefully. They should be interested in the product (e.g. are searching for a flat). Preferably, there will be no fixed tasks that have to be carried out by participants, but that depends on the available functionality of the prototype. For the abstract approach participants will have several encounters with the system and afterwards have to fill out a questionnaire (e.g. AttrakDiff), which is also able to capture evolving user experience. In the in-depth method participants will be able to provide ethnographic data through a modified experience sampling method and their user experience will be explicated through consecutive interviews, which also captures evolving user experience and in addition allows for a deeper level of involvement with the system. Important expected results are how feasible and time consuming the chosen methodology is in practice and which type of data or which findings are most helpful and insightful for the stakeholders of the project. Regarding epistemological implications there will be certainly findings about the type of knowledge that is generated by each approach and how these two types can be integrated with each other.

[1] Wright, P. & McCarthy, J. (2010). Experience-Centered Design: Designers, Users, and Communities in Dialogue. Synthesis Lectures on Human-Centered Informatics, 3(1), 1--123.

[2] Hassenzahl, M. (2010). Experience Design: Technology for All the Right Reasons. Synthesis Lectures on Human-Centered Informatics, 3(1), 1--95.

[3] Law, E. L.-C., Hvannberg, E. T., & Hassenzahl, M. (2006). User Experience -- Towards a unified view. In User Experience -- Towards a Unified View: Second International COST294-MAUSE Open Workshop (pp. 1--3).

