... title: Sweating the future: A precognition study



Abstract

Precognition is a form of extrasensory perception, described as conscious cognitive awareness of a future event that could not otherwise be anticipated through any known inferential process [1]. In order to study this parapsychological phenomenon, we are conducting a study following the example of Bem’s [1] original series of experiments which point out that we are likely to anticipate pleasant stimulus and avoid negative stimulus. For this purpose we are measuring the electrodermal activity of participants in reaction to neutral and arousing photographs. There are indices that the skin conductance response occurs sooner when the participant is about to see an arousing image as opposed to the normal reaction time when observing a neutral image, thus showing that participants have anticipated the image before it appeared on the screen. Our assumption is that the method of measuring the skin conductance response will be responsive enough to observe a notable difference between reaction times.
In the study, the skin conductance responses of 50 students from the University of Ljubljana of both genders are being measured. Each subject first answers 7 questions related to extrasensory perception which follow the example of Bem’s original study [1] and then they are exposed to a slideshow of randomly selected neutral and arousing photographs presented on a computer screen while having their skin conductivity, skin temperature and cardiac activity measured with a Biopac Student Lab system. The photographs are chosen randomly just before they appear on the screen to avoid any possibility of knowing the next picture. The study’s design consists of two rounds. In the first round subjects are exposed to 100 images, roughly 30% arousing and 70% neutral, appearing in 14 second intervals (7 seconds for picture and 7 seconds for blank screen).The electrodermal responses from the first round are analyzed and most arousing pictures for each individual are selected to ensure enough contrast between neutral and arousing responses. The second round consists of a series of 50 pictures (20 arousing and 30 neutral). The pictures are chosen from a collection of 100 erotic images (provided by the artists Erica Lust and Pierre Woodman) and 100 neutral images (100 images from IAPS database ranked as least arousing for the female population).
Since precognition is such a controversial and elusive phenomenon, it is ambitious to expect concrete results. However, if our results are significant we will have more evidence on our hands that there is something about our conscious perception of the flow of time that is beyond our understanding. With future research done in this field, it may well be discovered that our intuitions of causality may be at least in some respect wrong.

!!References:
[1] D. J. Bem, (2011). Feeling the future: experimental evidence for anomalous retroactive influences on cognition and affect. Journal of personality and social psychology, 100(3), 407.

