... title: “Viennese Language Cafés” – an Exploratory Case Study into a New Phenomenon



Abstract

A Language Café is a new cultural phenomenon adhering to the current spirit of the time. It is an autonomous, self-regulated learning process, within which people gather in an informal setting for a linguistic and cultural exchange. The concept is gaining popularity due to the world’s globalization and people’s desire to learn languages and socialize.

One of the main goals of the current work is to make a first scientific attempt of exploring Language Cafés in Vienna. For that purpose German Cafés were chosen, where the preferred language is German, and also German-English Tandem Cafés, where the languages switch according to the principle of a tandem. In the first step, general background information (e.g. motivation to visit, personal background) on the participants was collected via questionnaires. Next, the physical space of a Café was examined. For example, the group dynamics in terms of physical space was analyzed (e.g. the ability of the participants to move between tables and form different groups). An additional questionnaire about a personal language learning history and experience with Language Cafés in the past, was administered. 

One hypothesis was that the members of a Language Café are attending such meetings mainly to balance other forms of education, especially the formal learning in class. The first results confirm this hypothesis, showing that the majority of participants have recently been attending a language class or do so at the moment.

Further research questions are directed at the investigation of the relation between a meeting structure and people’s attitudes to a Café, as well as the goals of participants and the success rate of reaching these goals. 

As a preliminary result of this first exploration we suggest, that the more structured and guided the process is, the higher is the learning outcome for the participants. Similarly, the more relaxing the setting is, the lower seem to be the educational benefits, due to the fact that people constantly switch to English or their native language, or mostly are engaged in a “small talk”. However, compared to a “non-formal” setting, a “structured” setting makes people feel less comfortable and relaxed. Another problem which was identified was the problem of finding a topic of conversation with new acquaintances. This lowers the educational benefit and should be addressed further. 

The concluding part of the project includes reflections on what the ideal Language Café should look like. Except for being a means for cultural and language exchange, it can also include some key elements of a similar phenomenon, a World Café [1], which provides a platform for opinion sharing and creating new knowledge through interaction. Future research is needed to refine the present results which are first explorations into a new research field. 

!!References
[1] J.Brown und D.Isaac, The world café: Shaping our futures through conversations that matter. San Francisco CA: Berrett-Koehler Publishers, 2005

