... title: Discovering Biomarkers of Alzheimer Disease



Abstract

It is estimated that there were 46.8 million cases of dementia in the world in 2015 [1]. The most frequent cause of dementia is Alzheimer disease (AD), which is associated with extracellular amyloid plaques and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles [2]. 95% of cases with AD can be classified as late onset AD (LOAD), of which the biggest genetic risk factor is Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) E4 allele. The carrier of this allele does not necessarily get LOAD, but E4/- heterozygotes have two to three-fold increased risk of LOAD, while E4/E4 homozygotes have five-fold increased risk of LOAD. Carrying this allele is also associated with earlier onset of the disease [2], [3]. The frequency of ApoE E4 allele varies by region and its estimate is the highest in Northern Europe and the lowest in Asia and Southern Europe [3]. The aims of our research are (i) to assess the frequency of ApoE alleles in Slovene AD and non-AD population, as such estimate was not done yet, and (ii) to enable more accurate assessment of risk of AD in Slovenia with incorporation of genetic biomarkers into diagnosis protocol. Test subjects will be recruited in clinic of Centre for neurodegenerative diseases at Neurological clinic from patients with diagnosed AD by established clinical criteria. Controls will be recruited from patients relatives and companions without diagnosed AD and with comparable demographics (sex and age), as the test group. We estimate to have at least 200 subjects in each group. The peripheral blood will be taken from subjects and from it the DNA will be isolated and used for ApoE genotyping. Our project started with application for ethical approval from the Commission of the Republic of Slovenia for medical ethics. At the same time we assembled a database which could be used routinely in diagnostic laboratories for verification of genetic biomarkers. By doing this we expect to achieve traceability of the patients’ tissue samples and their anonymity. After verifying and improving both the database and the protocol, the ApoE genotyping will be performed.

!!References
[1]	M. Prince, A. Wimo, M. Guerchet, A. Gemma-Claire, Y.-T. Wu, and M. Prina, “World Alzheimer Report 2015: The Global Impact of Dementia - An analysis of prevalence, incidence, cost and trends,” Alzheimer’s Dis. Int., p. 84, 2015.
[2]	C. Reitz and R. Mayeux, “Alzheimer disease: Epidemiology, diagnostic criteria, risk factors and biomarkers,” Biochem. Pharmacol., vol. 88, no. 4, pp. 640–651, 2014.
[3]	A. Ward, S. Crean, C. J. Mercaldi, J. M. Collins, D. Boyd, M. N. Cook, and H. M. Arrighi, “Prevalence of Apolipoprotein E4 genotype and homozygotes (APOE e4/4) among patients diagnosed with alzheimer’s disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis,” Neuroepidemiology, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 1–17, 2012.

