... title: The Evolution of Morality: Axial Age in India



Abstract

Recent work in the cognitive study of religion found strong correlations between high levels of energy capture per capita (an indication of economic prosperity) and the emergence of moral religions [1]. The aim of the present paper is to trace the spiritual developments of ancient India during the Axial Age (i.e., ~800-200 B.C.) along the lines of behavioral ecology, in order to propose the following hypothesis: high levels of energy capture led individuals towards adopting a slow life-history strategy, which in turn favored the emergence of moral religions.
       According to behavioral ecology and life-history theory, everything else being equal, any organism will deploy at any given time a set of fundamental motivations and fitness-enhancing processing mechanisms, in accordance with the cues it receives from the environment. In this sense, in the case of an unfavorable environment, the organism will adopt a fast life-history strategy, marked by, among others, an earlier reproduction, lesser investment in quality of offspring in favor of quantity, overall opportunistic behavior and low levels of self-care [2]. This may have been reflected by the positive view on violence and material success of the tribal societies of the early Vedic period (i.e., the RigVedic tribes). The high levels of mortality and general insecurity of the environment were due to the scarcity of resources, which generated frequent tribal wars and within-clan conflicts. Political leaders would conduct sacrifices asking the gods for victory in battle and wealth in cattle. Immediate reciprocation was sought-after, with high incidences of narrow, “tit for tat” morality being representative for this period. Also, there was no regulation of sexual life and no concern for detachment, while the belief in reincarnation was still mediated by kinship (i.e., one would reincarnate as one’s own family member). The time of transition was marked by an increasing stratification of the social order, where the conducting of battles was gradually substituted by the competing for status in ritual settings. However, the much more prosperous time of the Axial Age (when energy capture was at an all time high) favored the adopting of a slow life-history strategy, associated with a later physiological development and sexual maturity, higher self-care, long-term investments and the delaying of gratification to increase future payoff. As a result, the late Vedic and post-Vedic period saw the emergence of practices such as asceticism, chastity and celibacy, renunciation, non-violence as well as an ethically-based belief in reincarnation. Moreover, the by now already entrenched ontological dualism encouraged high levels of altruism (e.g., bodhisattva) and redefined traditional, ritual-related core concepts (e.g., dharma, karma), by placing them under an ethical scope. This ultimately resulted in expanding the moral circle [3]. 
      Finally, our hypothesis seems to be in accordance with data from the cognitive study of religion.        


[1] N. Baumard et. al., „Increased Affluence Explains the Emergence of Ascetic Wisdoms and Moralizing Religions”. Current Biology, 25, 1-6, January 5 , 2015.

[2] D. Nettle. “Social Class Through the Evolutionary Lense”. The Psychologist, vol. 22, no. 11, pp. 934-937, 2009.

[3] P. Olivelle. “The Semantic History of Dharma: The Middle and Late Vedic Periods”. Journal of Indian Philosophy, 32, pp. 491-511, 2004.

