... title: Assessment of Sleep -Wake Patterns in Lesch’s Type 1 and Type 2 Tobacco  Dependents



Abstract

A significant correlation between smoking and sleep interruptions which are related to chronic diseases have been documented in many research papers [1,2]. Any interruption in the neurotransmitters of the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN)[3], the hypothalamic– pituitary adrenal axis (HPA), or the hypothalamus, interferes negatively in producing sleep disorders. Earlier animal studies showed that nicotine influences the circadian system via stimulating the nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) in SCN of the hypothalamus. The stimulation of nicotine to the HPA axis leads to the secretion of corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus. This secretion urges the production of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) in the pituitary gland and hence leads to the increased secretion of cortisol by the adrenal gland. The sleep neurotransmitter like GABA and melatonin can be suppressed either through the inhibition of nicotine to neurons in SCN or through the stimulation of nicotine to the HPA functions by increasing the secretion of monoaminergic transmitters like serotonin, dopamine, noradrenalin. These neurophysiological pathways of suppressing the sleep system due to nicotine abuse is confirmed by a study of cortisol test from morning and evening saliva of patients suffering from primary insomnia. The high cortisol level which was found in the early morning's saliva was strongly correlated to the low sleep quality of the patients at night. The purpose of this study is to investigate the relationship between tobacco and sleep disorders in Lesch type 1 and type 2 smokers through the assessment of their biomarkers and their sleep patterns. Building on our previous data from the four types of Lesch tobacco dependents, we assume to see sleep disorders like insomnia disorder in type 1 smokers who may have less total sleep time (TST), longer sleep latency, high REM sleep density, in comparison with type 2 and the control group. In this investigation, the Lesch European Smoker Classification instrument and test of biomarkers will be used to assess the nicotine dependence. To assess the sleep structure in different severities of tobacco abuse in this study, we aim to use actigraphy in combination with sleep log and polysomnography (PSG).

!!References:

[1] L. Trachsel, H. C. Heller, and J. D. Miller, “Nicotine phase-advances the circadian neuronal activity rhythm in rat suprachiasmatic nuclei explants,” Neuroscience, vol. 65, no. 3, pp. 797–803, 1995.
[2] S. A. Ferguson, D. J. Kennaway, and R. W. Moyer, “Nicotine phase shifts the 6- sulphatoxymelatonin rhythm and induces c-Fos in the SCN of rats,” Brain Res. Bull., vol. 48, no. 5, pp. 527–538, 1999.
[3] L. Lin, J. Faraco, R. Li, H. Kadotani, W. Rogers, X. Lin, X. Qiu, P. J. de Jong, S. Nishino, and E. Mignot, “The Sleep Disorder Canine Narcolepsy Is Caused by a Mutation in the Hypocretin (Orexin) Receptor 2 Gene,” Cell, vol. 98, no. 3, pp. 365–376, 1999.

