... title: Differences in our constructions of reality



Abstract

Science versus religion debates often boil down to an argument between two very different notions of what qualifies as knowledge and how it is attained. Perry (1968)[1] distinguishes these epistemological beliefs into dualism – the conception of knowledge as either right or wrong and reliance on authority for the distinction, and relativism – where knowledge and its application varies between contexts and there is no one authority that has all the answers. Our research attempts to apply von Foerster's[2] constructivism and his postulate that “[t]he nervous system is organized (or organizes itself) so that it computes a stable reality” to this distinction between different epistemological beliefs. In this vein we hypothesise that we differ in our constructions of reality. 

Content-oriented types construct their lifeworld with a model of the world (all knowledge refers to this one world), whereas relation-oriented types refer to a multitude of different communicative situations. Communication, in the case of relation-oriented types is used to maintain interpersonal relationships in these communicative situations. Content-oriented types, on the other hand, use communication to describe their model of the world. Coinciding with Perry's (1968)[1] categories, Relation-oriented types are dualistic in their perception of knowledge (depending on authority) and content-oriented types use knowledge from different sources to build on their model of the world.

Our research plan is to first conduct a thorough introspection in order to refine our model. In order to test our model we shall conduct in-depth phenomenological interviews. In order to tackle one of the challenges of exploring these constructions of reality – the prediction that persons with relation-oriented constructions of reality are averse towards (self)research – we shall conduct special interview sessions conducted by many different interviewers, with the prediction that content-oriented persons will not show great differences in their answers between different communicational situations. What we also have to very strongly look out for is our own influence on our observations, seeing how we both identify as constructing reality in a content-oriented way, as well as the scientific method in general being a content-oriented procedure.

Our goal is to test and refine our model, perhaps expanding it beyond the two originally hypothesised types, if the interviews reveal such necessity. This research hopes to provide useful groundwork for future studies. A hopeful vision for the future would include the search for neurological correlates of epistemological attitudes, joining first person experience with third person observations.

[1] W. G. Perry, “Patterns of Development in Thoughts and Values of Students in Liberal Arts College: A Validation of a Scheme. Final Report.” Harvard Univ., Cambridge, Mass. Bureau of Study Counsel, 1968.

[2] H. von Foerster, “On Constructing a Reality” in Adolescent Psychiatry 15: Developmental and Clinical Studies, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1988, pp. 77–95.

