... title: Experience of Sexual Fantasy



Abstract

Up until the second half of the 20th century, many authors suggested that sexual fantasies should be treated as a form of sexual dysfunction and/or sexual deviation. Since then, the study of sexual fantasies has become an important part of understanding human sexuality. As numerous researchers now suggest, sexual fantasizing can be a normal‚ adaptive‚ and healthy aspect of sexuality for both men and women [1]. Apparently‚ almost everyone at least occasionally engages in sexual fantasizing‚ either to enhance the pleasure of other sexual activities (e.g.‚ intercourse or masturbation) or as a pleasurable act in and of itself [2]. Until now, studies were mainly quantitative and therefore lacking a subjective dimension. Our goal is to expand our knowledge about sexual fantasies with a phenomenological study as we believe it is essential to take into account the subjective dimension of the phenomenon in order to fully understand it.

Our aim is to attempt at unfolding the micro-dynamics of experience of sexual fantasizing. To do that we will use second-person in-depth phenomenological inquiry [3]. This technique consists of two phases. First, we will interview our participants about their experience of sexual fantasizing and familiarize them with the research question. Second, participants showing enough interest to become co-researchers will be encouraged to observe the phenomenon in their everyday life and keep a diary. Later in short temporal proximity, we will carry out in-depth phenomenological interviews on the basis of journal entries. We wish to highlight the overall process of fantasizing – how a fantasy emerges, how it progresses and is finally dismissed. Along this process, our focus will be on possible different modalities of the experience, triggers, and emotions. We will also be interested in possible effects of daily and major life events (e.g., stress or extreme happiness) on the micro-dynamics of the phenomenon.

Due to the small number of participants which is characteristic of the method used, we will not be able to generalize our results. Rather, we aim to enrich and refine the current understanding of sexual fantasizing and highlight potentially unseen aspects of sexual fantasies. Hopefully, the obtained knowledge will enable better quantitative research designs. 

##References
[1]	H. Leitenberg and K. Henning, “Sexual Fantasy,” Psychological bulletin, vol. 117, no. 3, p. 469, 1995.
[2]	D. Knafo and Y. Jaffe, “Sexual Fantasizing in Males and Females,” Journal of Research in Personality, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 451–462, 1984.
[3]	U. Kordeš and F. Kausler, “Second-Person in-Depth Phenomenological Inquiry as an Approach for Studying Enaction of Beliefs,” Interdisciplinary description of complex systems, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 369–377, 2016.

