... title: Motor-evoked and TMS-evoked Potentials: Correlation between the two Measures and their Modulation after 5-Days-Consecutive iTBS Intervention



Abstract

Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) has developed into a powerful tool for studying human brain physiology and brain connectivity. It has been widely used to probe excitability and plasticity of the human cortex. Traditionally used for the quantification of excitability are motor-evoked potentials (MEPs), the motor responses observable in peripheral muscles as an effect of stimulating the motor cortex. This method bears two obvious limitations: First, it is limited assessing excitability in the motor cortex only. Second, MEP amplitude is intrinsically variable from trial to trial which makes its validity questionable. Concurrent TMS-EEG recording provides a more direct access to the effects of stimulation of all cortical areas by analyzing the deflections occurring in the EEG after the TMS pulse, so called TMS-evoked potentials (TEPs). Several TEPs are already described in literature, though their meaning is largely unknown.
For this study, 20 healthy subjects were recruited and received a 5-days-consecutive-iTBS (intermediate Theta Burst Stimulation) intervention, a form of repetitive TMS (rTMS), which is thought to increase cortex excitability. Repeating stimulation sessions should cause more enduring and reliable changes of cortex activity than a single intervention. On the first and last day concurrent EEG/TMS- recordings were conducted. As a first step we attempt to shed light on possible differences in the amplitude, latencies and number of TEPs observable when using different preprocessing parameters in the off-line EEG-analysis of the data. After the establishment of a preprocessing pipeline the correlation between MEP amplitude and TEP amplitude on a single trials as well as on a group basis (high vs low MEP amplitude) will be investigated. This has only been done once by Mäki and Ilmoniemi for the N15-P30 TEP component [1]. Our approach will try to confirm their results as well as extend the analysis to other TEPs in other brain regions. In addition the information on power in certain frequency bands and phase obtained by frequency analysis will serve as a further source for explaining MEP variability.
Similarly to a study about modulation of early TEPs after rTMS application [2], we will examine differences in MEP and/or TEP appearing after the 5-days-consecutive iTBS application. We expect the modulatory effects to be more evident than in previous studies, as this is to our knowledge the first TMS-EEG study where subjects have received iTBS for five days.

!! References
[1]H. Mäki and R. Ilmoniemi, "The relationship between peripheral and early cortical activation induced by transcranial magnetic stimulation", Neuroscience Letters, vol. 478, no. 1, pp. 24-28, 2010.
[2]D. Veniero, M. Bortoletto and C. Miniussi, "Cortical modulation of short-latency TMS-evoked potentials", Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, vol. 6, 2013.

