... title: The Paradox of Freedom: What Believing in Free Will Can Do For Us?



Abstract

A fierce debate has been unfolding between philosophers, psychologists, and neuroscientists around the topic of free will. Our experience shows us that we are free to choose which way to take, which choice to make, which ideas to believe in. Nonetheless, recent research has shown that even our simplest choices are being triggered by some previous event, making difficult to sustain the case for free will both in brain research and behavioral research. So the question here is not to pick a side and try to decide which one is right, but this: Since we came to develop such a belief in free will, what does it do for us? If and how the belief in free will transform our behavior?
Kathleen D. Vohs [1] examined this question and found that  a lack of belief in free will - that is in a deterministic chain of events - increases cheating. Several other papers suggested similar outcomes.[2][3] This time, we wanted to examine this phenomenon in the working environment. We wanted to explore if and how the belief in free will, compared to a deterministic belief and a neutral belief, could in fact influence the results of employees in terms of altruistic behavior, moral behavior and in creative problem-solving. 
We’ve developed a questionnaire containing 3 types of problems to be solved by the subjects. From a sample of 120 individuals, we divided the sample into 3 groups, each containing one belief induction - one for free will, one for determinism, one neutral. The questionnaires were sent to several different companies (12 different companies in several business industries) to be responded at random and anonymously. 
Our hypothesis is that, if this experiment shows similar results from the ones found in the literature, we can expect significant differences in the behavior of those subjects presented with the deterministic belief: we shall expect increasing in cheating, decreasing in altruism and creativity. Verifying this hypothesis should mean that we get to the heart of the free will paradox, that is, if the belief induction actually changes the observed behavior, this means that the freedom of the will in this particular event did not occur, even if the belief induced is the belief in the freedom of the will. Nevertheless, the outputs of this research, if confirming the original hypothesis, would translate into a necessity of reinforcing free will belief in the  corporate discourse as well as to lead further investigation around what else may trigger positive behaviors. 

References: 
[1] Vohs, K. D. & Baumeister, R. F. Handbook of Self-Regulation, Third edition. New York : The Guilford Press, 2016. 
[2] Baer, J. Are we free?: psychology and free will, New York: Oxford University Press, 2008. 
[3] Harris, S. Free will, New York: Free Press, 2012.

