... title: Parasomnia versus nocturnal epilepsy: use of video as a diagnostic tool



Abstract

!!!! Parasomnia versus nocturnal epilepsy: use of video as a diagnostic tool

!! Introduction						
Sleep is a cyclical process of repeated non-rapid eye movement sleep (NREM) and rapid eye-movement sleep (REM) phases with distinct characteristics. Disrupted sleep may lead to motor and cognitive dysfunctions and can have serious consequences [1]. Parasomnias are undesirable physical events during sleep and may have similar representation as nocturnal epilepsy. Distinguishing these  paroxysmal events during sleep is difficult but essential for determining appropriate therapy [2]. Nocturnal polysomnography (PSG) with simultaneous video recording is the gold diagnostic standard. The diagnosis is made on the basis of electroencephalographic activity (EEG) and video recording. Diagnosing paroxysmal events on the basis of PSG is time consuming and expensive. Paroxysmal events during sleep involve a range of motoric movements that can be seen on video-EEG-polysomnography and are therefore recognizable by watching and analyzing behaviour of a person while asleep.

We present here a study of paroxysmal events during sleep, in which we discuss if it is possible to distinguish, based only on videotapes, between parasomnias and nocturnal epilepsy. The aim of the study was to test how precise and accurate can we predict the right diagnosis with just the video as a diagnostic tool. 

!! Methods
After a broad research of literature we decided to study only patients suffering from parasomnia or nocturnal seizures. We gathered and retrospectively analyzed 20 videos of patients of which 16 are suffering from parasomnia and 4 from nocturnal epilepsy.  All patients underwent video-PSG at the Clinical Institute of clinical neurophysiology at the University medical center, Ljubljana, Slovenia. Retrospective analysis of the recordings were made using a diagnostic decision tree generated by Derry et al. [3]. The video analysis were double blind (without knowing any of their EEG, health history details or outcome diagnosis). 

!! Results
We correctly identified 2/4 or 50% of patients diagnosed with epilepsy. One patient was incorrectly diagnosed with parasomnia and for one we could not determine the diagnose. Also 15/16 or 93,75% of patients suffering from parasomnia (NREM and REM) were rightly identified. The other one was incorrectly diagnosed with epilepsy. 

!! Conclusions
Results of our small retrospective study show that video analysis may represent a simple diagnostic tool with a good chance of a correct diagnosis for parasomnia and less reliable for nocturnal epilepsy. Video analysis does not replace PSG recording, but can assist in making accurate diagnosis of these serious neurological disorders. Further studies with large numbers of patients are needed to confirm our results.

!! References					
[1] M. A. Carskadon, W. C. Dement, “Normal human sleep: an overview,” in Principles and practice of sleep medicine, vol. 4, 2010, pp. 13–23.
[2] E. K. S. Louis, “Sleep and epilepsy: strange bedfellows no more,” in Minerva Pneumol, vol. 50(3), 2011, pp. 159–176. 
[3] C. P. Derry, A. S. Harvey, M. C. Walker, J. S. Duncan, S. F. Berkovic, “NREM arousal parasomnias and their distinction from nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy: a video EEG analysis,” in Sleep, vol. 32(12), 2009, pp. 1637–1644.

