... title: EMOTIONAL EXPERIENCE OF INDIVIDUALS WITH AUTISTIC SPECTRUM DISORDER



Abstract

The following presentation represents a brief introduction of the theme of my master's thesis – emotional experience of individuals with autistic spectrum disorder. Please keep in mind that it is by no means a solid scientific contribution yet. 

Autistic spectrum disorders (ASDs) are a type of pervasive developmental disorder. It is stated (Bear, 2001) that persons with such a disorder have significant qualitative impairments in the area of social communication and social integration, as well as restricted repetitive and stereotyped patterns of behavior, interests, and activities. Taking in account the types of characteristic impairments of ASDs, different theories of psychological functioning have been constructed. Individuals with ASDs are thought to be severely impaired in »reading the minds« of other people, a concept captured in the theory of mind hypothesis of ASDs. The theory involves two components: 1) the ability to attribute mental states to oneself and others, and to realize that others have independent minds; and 2) the ability to express an appropriate emotional reaction to the other person's mental states. The proposed deficits in reading other people's feelings and thought have been used to explain the impairments in social interactions and communication as well as inappropriate responses in social encounters. Thus, the emotion domain, which also includes understanding, expressing and regulating emotions, is the most basic of the main domains in ASDs and the only one that is also universally atypical (Ben Shalom, 2009).
It is the aim of this talk to show that the role of emotion (emotional experiencing) is crucial in the everyday functioning of individuals with ASDs.   

In order to experience states, we need to be conscious or aware of them, also meaning that we are consciously aware that an emotion system in our brain is active. Panksepp (Panksepp, 2008) hypothesizes that the mechanism of consciousness is the same for emotional and nonemotional subjective states, and that what distinguishes these states is the brain system that consciousness is aware of at the time (feelings and the brain). The working memory has been linked to conscious experiencing of psychological states. LeDoux suggested that human emotional feelings arise when subcortical information about emotional bodily changes reaches higher working memory, and cognitive consciousness generators in the dorsolateral frontal cortex (Panksepp, 2008).
Several theorists have proposed that consciousness has something to do with a mental workspace where things can be compared, contrasted, and mentally manipulated. The mechanism of this workspace is often described using working memory, which integrates information across sensory modalities with long-term memory into unified representations, holds the representation temporarily in an active state, and uses the representation in controlling mental activity and behavior. Various other studies also point to the prefrontal cortex, especially the dorsolateral prefrontal areas, as being involved in working memory processes. Others also state that present stimuli and stored representations are integrated in working memory by way of interactions among prefrontal areas, sensory processing systems, and the long-term explicit memory system (involving the hippocampus and related areas of the temporal lobe). Working memory may involve interactions among several prefrontal areas, including the anterior cingulate, insular, and orbital cortical regions, as well as dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. It has been strongly suggested by studies (LeDoux, 2008) that the prefrontal cortex is involved in conscious experience. When sensory stimuli are consciously perceived they activate sensory cortex and prefrontal areas, but when conscious awareness is blocked (by manipulation for purposes of experiment) only sensory cortex is active (LeDoux, 2008).
Returning back to individuals with ASDs, I pose the question: how do people with ASDs process emotion? How is their emotional processing different from the emotional processing of individuals without ASDs? 

LeDoux (Ben Shalom, 2009) argues that there are at least three levels of emotion processing in the brain: 1) a basic level of processing of physiological emotions, 2) an integrative level based on emotional states (which requires further exploration of responses), and 3) a logical level of processing of emotion. 

Ben Shalom (Ben Shalom, 2009) raises the hypothesis that in high-functioning ASDs conscious feelings (based on level 2) are more atypical than physiological emotions (level 1) and that logical processing of emotion (level 3) might be used for compensatory strategies. In low-functioning ASDs, there is much less opportunity for logical processing or level 3 compensations. Anatomically, there is evidence of atypical functioning of the amygdale and the medial prefrontal cortex. 
According to this hypothesis, an atypicality of the emotion integrative level could lead to atypical emotional experiences and a lack of common basic experiences with other people. This lack of common experiences could be one explanation for the theory of mind deficits and for atypical social development in persons with ASDs (Ben Shalom, 2009).

In the conclusion I will integrate and elaborate more on the presented theories of emotional processing and experiencing in individuals with ASDs, as well as introduce methods for possible research on the discussed topic. 

KEY WORDS: emotions, experience of emotion, Autistic Spectrum Disorders (ASDs), prefrontal cortex

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ben Shalom, D. (2009). The Medial Prefrontal Cortex and Integration in Autism. The Neuroscientist, 589-598.
LeDoux, J. and Phelps, E. A. (2008). Emotional Networks in the Brain. In Lewis, Haviland-Jones, and Feldman Barrett, Handbook of Emotions (pp. 159-179). New York, London: The Guildford Press.
Panksepp, J. (2008). The Affective brain and Core Consciousness - How Does Neural Activity Generate Emotional Feelings? In Lewis, Haviland-Jones, and Feldman Barrett, Handbook of Emotions (pp. 47-67). New York, London: The Guildford Press.

