... title: Game of Evolution



Abstract

Game of Evolution, an autonomous strategic game slightly inspired by the Conway's Game of Life, is a program which simulates the evolution of life within a world. The world is represented as a toroidal integer-valued grid, where individuals move as agents and act according to their intrinsic properties and their surroundings within the grid. Aim of the project was to simulate fight for resources and survival of populations consisting of prey and predators. Furthermore, the goal was to create a software framework for the dynamic interaction with configurable environment and possible further implementation extensions like different population types guided by neural network, for instance. A hypothesis was that a probability based ruled system used for decision making with combination of the ,,visual" perception, the ability to remember the environment, communicate, and cooperate would be sufficient to simulate behavior of predator-prey model and reach different possible outcomes described in [3]. 
The relation, which occurs between two competing and co-evolving species, such as a predator and prey, refers to "Red Queen effect". The Red Queen effect is an evolutionary hypothesis about a durable constant mutual relationship of evolving species. The term is taken from the Red Queen's race in Lewis Carroll's book Through the Looking-Glass, where the Red Queen said to Alice, "It takes all the running you can do, to keep in the same place." In an evolutionary system, it refers to evolutionary cycling. The Red Queen effect means that a continuous improvement of a population of one species is essential for the population to remain at the same level as an evolving population of another species. The effect is related to "arms race", in which improvements in one population cause improvements in the other population and vice versa [2]. The possible outcomes of a competitive co-evolution are described in [3]: (1) the prey population evolves a defense so strong that no predator in the current population can overcome it, as a result the predator population dies out and the prey population survive and prosper, (2) the predator population evolves an offensive strategy so strong that no prey in the current population can resist it and thus the prey population dies out and the predators survive and prosper, or (3) populations of both species the predator and the prey co-evolve evenly, and both are able to survive (the Red Queen effect) [3].
We implemented an agent-based model with actively moving prey (herbivores) and predators (carnivores), and static plants. Each agent chooses an action (move, grow, breed, look) according to the amount of energy the agent is disposing and the information about the agent's neighborhood. Every action costs a different amount of energy and prices are different for each individual and depend on the height of the individual. Individuals within a population cooperate by sharing an observation map. The model contains an individual-level reproduction mechanism, which is controlled by a population-density limit. The aim of each individual is to survive at the population level. By setting different initial conditions that were found empirically, we produced three different outcomes described in [3]: (1) predator extinction, (2) prey extinction, and (3) arms race or the Red Queen persistence of both the predator population and the prey population.
The Red Queen effect of co-evolving populations can be modeled as not only an agent-based system but also as an equation-based model, for instance by Lotka-Volterra equations (a pair of first-order, non-linear differential equations) [1]. Both modeling methods have important applications in many areas including economical and biological sciences, or ecology.
_____________
References:
[1]Kaplan D., Glass L (1997) Understanding Nonlinear Dynamics, Springer
[2]Van Valen L. (1973) A new evolutionary law. Evolutionary Theory 1
[3]Dieckmann, U., Marrow, P., and Laws, R. (1995) Evolutionary cycling in predator-prey interactions: Population dynamics and the red queen, Journal of Theoretical Biology 176

