... title: Sketch-tracking: Concept of experimental method for visuomotor behavioral analyses.



Abstract

While reading this text, writing a short note or drawing a simple sketch, we are pushed, by our lifelong cultural background training into specific drives of more or less unconscious strategies and behaviour. Empirical observations of these drives are supported by many studies, for example the ones based on the eye-tracking methods [1][2]. These consist of recording of the movements of eyes perceiving a particular object or scene and after that the technology reproduces the exact coordinates of the eye focus at any given time and clearly reflects a particular visuomotor behaviour of the eye. Outputs of these methods are very accurate models of strategies of focusing our visual attention. Visual attention participates on the process of gaining our inner representation of the visual scene [3].

My work is a concept for an experiment which could analyze a similar visuomotor behaviour by tracking down the eye-hand movements, particularly the sketching moves during redrawing tasks. I will try to shift from the eye-trackers method by focusing on an active reproduction of our inner representations which occur when solving specific tasks. Instead of just simply tracking the attention of experiment participants this concept will focus on the tracking of the working memory under the influence of spatial orientation, mental rotation and other possible influences.

In comparison to the technology behind eye-trackers, the recording of sketches or drawings has a much less demanding computing technology. Basically, it can be made on any touch-screen featured displays by simply recording the x-y coordinates and the time values from the device pointer. These records can be processed and edited by simple filtering of the push and release points of the line strokes or by detecting the changes of movements directions. From these data-sets we will be able to create a fully vectorized model directed graphs of moves suitable for any kind of analysis. 

The analysis will consist of several points. At the beginning, we will analyze individual strategies for each move that was done during the sketching experiment, through a comparison with an expected left to right and top-down convention. We will observe whether these movements are or are not against these expectations and whether there are any significancies for some particular sub-tasks of drawing. There are also expected different approaches of participants in choosing their starting points, vertexes, different ordering of drawing lines and different synthesis for reproducing the dominant and non-dominant sides of the presented objects.

One of my hypotheses is that an increasing complexity of tasks will raise the divergence of individually chosen ways per object. The experiment will begin with simple redrawing tasks of well-known objects like letters and numbers (which will be expected to be done fluently and unconsciously) and will be concluded with more complicated 2D and 3D line objects like squares, triangles, cubes and polygons, with an aim of analyzing characteristic biases and conventions of each tested person. The presented objects will not be displayed during the full time of the task, but just within the "key-pressed" time. This way I will be able to measure the time of "reading" and compare it with the number of drawing steps done by heart after the memorizing process.

A special and final place in my experiment will be reserved to the category of optical illusions known as impossible objects, which the human cognition is not trained to remember or represent any stronger holistic model or abstraction of. With these kinds of objects I expect non-trained people to be able to remember just their parts and not their whole models. By the means of the orientated graphs precision we will be able to measure and observe to which extent participants were able to cognitively process such objects and what strategies were used for their inner representation.

[1] Alfred L. Yarbus: Eye Movements and Vision. New York, Plenum Press (1967).
[2] Kurt Colvin, Rahul M. Dodhia, Sean Belcher and Key Dismukes: Scanning for visual traffic: An eye tracking study. NASA Ames Research Center (2003).
[3] Blair, Mark R. Watson, Marcus R. Walshe, R. Calen, Maj, Fillip: Extremely selective attention: Eye-tracking studies of the dynamic allocation of attention to stimulus features in categorization. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, Vol. 35(5), 1196-1206 (2009).

