... title: Immunohistochemical localization of adenosin A3 receptors in rat brain and specific human brain regions



Abstract

Adenosine is a widespread signalling molecule that regulates various physiological functions through specific cell membrane receptors. Via pharmacological studies and molecular cloning, four different adenosine receptor subtypes have been identified and classified as A1, A2A, A2B and A3, so far. All four of them are members of the G-protein-coupled receptor family. It has been shown, that the adenosine A3-receptor (A3R) plays a critical role for manifold physiological and pathological conditions, like cardio- and neuroprotective processes, inflammation and immune response, asthma and cancer. [1] In contrast to the other subtypes, there are still many open questions regarding the distribution and density of the A3R. Therefore, we have established an immunohistochemical protocol to visualize the A3R distribution in frozen brain sections of both, human and rat origin. 
Briefly, we incubated 10µm tissue slices with anti-A3R polyclonal antibodies (Atlas Antibodies) over-night, in order to assure highest possible specificity for the antibody – A3R-epitope interaction. Thus, subsequent detection and visualization was performed with a biotinylated secondary antibody against the A3R bound primary antibodies and an avidin-biotin-HRP complex, enabling the localized conversion of a reagent (AEC) into a red chromophore. The protocol was optimized for cryogenic tissue sections and momentarily applied on a variety of coronal rat brain slices and on samples of the following human brain regions: hippocampus, frontal cortex and posterior ganglions. We hypothesize, that substantial red staining correlates with the presence of A3R. 
In both species, cortex appeared to be the region most prominently expressing A3R.  In accordance with the finding that “Western blot analysis showed that A3 receptors are present in rat hippocampal nerve terminal membranes“ we detected an intense immunoreactivity in the hippocampus of both species [2]. Finally we observed a correlation of staining between human and rodent striatum (nucleus caudatus, putamen), where the A3R-immunoreactivity is restricted to specific cells, not yet identified. Other regions of considerable anti-A3R immunoreactivity in the rodent brain were: amygdala central nucleus, thalamus and zona incerta. For a better understanding of A3R–system, it would be an interesting and necessary enterprise to clarify if the corresponding human brain regions exhibit a similar antibody staining. We believe that the given immunohistochemistry protocol could serve as a helpful tool to investigate this and further questions concerning the A3R. 

[1] Borea et al: The A3 adenosine receptor: An enigmatic player in cell biology. Pharmacology & Therapeutics 117 (2008) 123 - 140 
[2] Lopes et al: Adenosine A3 receptors are located in neurons of the rat hippocampus. Neuroreport. 2003 Aug 26;14(12):1645-8

