... title: Rethinking materialism: an outline of integrative science



Abstract

!!!!Rethinking materialism: an outline of integrative science

!!Introduction
Contemporary science is predominantly based on a materialist paradigm. It assumes that everything is essentially material and governed by deterministic or random interactions. The best or only scientific method is to separate the world into discrete concepts, measure it from the third-person view, and base theory primarily on these data, rather than on more holistic insights.

The materialist approach has achieved successes in many areas. On the other hand, it has some notable shortcomings, mainly in the study of consciousness and answering the "big questions" (e. g. Why is there something and not nothing?). In my thesis, I propose a method of first-person inquiry that could complement materialism. A unification of these two approaches would form the basis of integrative science.

!!The complement: first-person research
I propose a method of first-person research that would require researchers to train their mental abilities: heighten their perceptiveness to inner phenomena, and develop the ability to retain a lucid, critical, self-aware consciousness in various altered states of consciousness (e. g. lucid dreaming).

This method could help overcome the limitations of materialism:
* It would allow us to systematically observe and experiment with certain conscious phenomena (e. g. lucid dreaming), enabling to have a more comprehensive view of the human mind.
* Research shows that some altered states of consciousness, e. g. dreaming, foster insights. [1] Being more lucid in these states could perhaps enable us to gain insights more effectively. Based on these insights, we could build more holistic theories.
* Mystics claim that by sustained cultivation of certain inner  practices, a whole new range of conscious phenomena can be unlocked and experienced. Some of these experiences purportedly provide a type of knowledge which provides answers to the "big questions". This knowledge is said to be objective, but inexplicable in terms of materialism. By systematically examining these experiences, we could find out if such knowledge is possible. [2]

All observations gathered by the method I propose could  be intersubjectively compared by researchers who have developed the necessary skills. Some insights could also be verified using third-person methods. Thus the objective would be separated from the subjective, as science requires.

!!Conclusion: integrative science
The unification of first- and third-person research approaches would form the basis of integrative science that would enable us to explore a wider range of phenomena than materialism currently does.

!!References
[1] U. Wagner et al., "Sleep Inspires Insight," in Nature, 2013, 427, pp. 352-355.
[2] K. Wilber, R. Walsh, " An Integral Approach to Consciousness Research," in Velmans, M. (ed.), Investigating Phenomenal Consciousness: New Methodologies and Maps (pp. 301-332). Amsterdanm: John Benjamins Publishing Company.

