... title: Self-organization of Sensomotoric Representations and Their Usage in Object Grasping



Abstract

In our project we are focusing on exploration of neurological researches dedicated to functioning of sensomotoric circuits and formation of sensory and motor representations in premotor cortex and superior temporal sulcus brain area. We have analyzed several models of mirror neuron system and isolated problematic places and inspired by recent researches of D.Perrett et.al [1] and V. Caggiano et.al [2] we have designed our own modular model of mirror neuron system for robotics incorporating model of premotor cortex (PMC), posterior and anterior superior temporal sulcus (pSTS, aSTS), parieto frontal cortex and model of motor execution. We have focused on adding model of STS where are processed visual data on high level and model of motor execution (Controller for Reaching and Graspin - CRG). The aim of our project is to prepare all building blocks and perform series of tests with them.
All modules of our mirror neuron system are based on sub-symbolic paradigm built up from neural networks. We have prepared two training datasets, one for PMC module, where are proprioceptive information of arm states, where arm was performing three types of grasps. The second dataset was for pSTS modul, where according to D.Perrett et.al [1] are populations of neurons discriminating object or action and perspective from which are observed. The dataset for pSTS was artificially created from original dataset for PMC applying geometrical processing we have obtained four instances of the same grasp observed from different viewpoints. Data for model CRG were generated from images taken by Microsoft Kinect camera and processed by specialized libraries Point Cloud Library and Vision For Robotics library.
For implementation of pSTS and PMC modules were used recurrent self-organizing maps and for implementation of aSTS was used classical self-organizing map. The model CRG was implemented using architecture of actor-critic and trained by recent reinforcement learning training algorithm for continuous environment CACLA [3].
In the first experiment we focused on exploration of performance and suitable parameters of used self-organizing maps for our main task. Our main goal was to reproduce results of researches of D.Perrett et.al [1]. We suspected that after training the main organization of pSTS module will discriminate data by the perspective of observer and beneath will be sub-organization into three clusters referring to three types of grasps. PMC module should be organized into three compact clusters, each representing type of grasp. Module aSTS where we wanted to reach creation of perspective invariant neurons was taking input from activation of pSTS and PMC modules and that resulted in reversed organization as have pSTS, so that main clusters were representing types of grasps and each main cluster contained sub-clusters representing perspectives. But this is only the first step of our goal to emerge perspectively invariant neurons.
CRG model was tested in task of reaching and grasping of objects  different sizes and orientation. Then we performed tests with added noise to object positions which revealed ability of generalization and good performance in slightly changed environment. In the completed model of mirror neurons this model will generate input for PMC and pSTS modules. 
The future task remains integrating all mentioned modules together, solving problem of emerging of invariant neurons. There also appeared catastrophic interference in tests of CRG model with more than one objects simultaneously. 
In the end we can conclude that our designs fulfill our expectations and proposed model have very good chance to expand our frontiers of cognitive robotics and action understanding.

