... title: The Terror Management Theory (TMT) under the Perspective of an Existential Quest



Abstract

Building from the ideas of existential theorists [1, 2], Terror Management Theory (TMT) addresses the existential anxiety associated with people’s thoughts about their inevitable death. The theory is founded on two tenets: (a) that a primary instinct for humans is to preserve themselves; and (b) that humans are able to comprehend that they will ultimately fail at their goal of self-preservation. The clash between one’s self-preservation instinct and the outlook of one’s inevitable demise is, therefore, a potential source of existential fright and terror. TMT has focused on exploring how people keep these existential fears at bay. TMT proposes that people usually attempt not to think about their mortality to avoid being overwhelmed by this conflict. However, once they are reminded of their mortality, they feel existentially vulnerable. In order to avoid becoming overwhelmed by their mortal predicament, they activate two consecutive defense processes: They first respond by (a) proximal defending, i.e. by rationalizing about death or distancing themselves from it. Downplaying their eventual mortality allows easier repression of death-related thoughts. However, these thoughts are still activated at the fringes of consciousness which then activate (b) distal defenses to aim for granting symbolic immortality. Unfortunately, once people invest their deepest existential concerns into a world view, the presence of other world view constructs may be experienced as a threat. People tend to become self-serving, less tolerant, more conservative, nationalistic and display more ingroup bias. 
Generative as TMT may be, there still remain open questions about this theory. According to Becker [2], there is no way out of the existential dilemma other than heroically enduring the human condition or to fall for defensive processing (e.g. world view defense). We note that the TMT literature so far has done little to address the question of less defensive ways to cope with death. Some evidence suggest that not all people become equally defensive when mortality salient, but people on an existential quest do not display the commonly found TMT-effects on world view defense. Thus, it appears that their lowered death defensiveness stands in some contradiction to TMT’s basic tenet that death itself is at the core of the TMT-processes. 
The research described here is set out to address these questions in more detail: we aimed to investigate the impact of situationally evoked factors on subsequent death defensiveness. For this, participants were subjected to (a) manipulation texts of afterlife beliefs or (b) texts that encouraged the individual, existential quest (along with the necessity of annihilation). Participants had to fill in open-ended questions aimed at mortality salient induction (while the control group was exposed to pain specific questions) and finally their perception of social transgression was evaluated by the Multidimensional Social Transgression Scale [3] querying their world view defense. Preliminary results indicate that participants tested under mortality salient conditions seem to respond to social transgressors in a comparable manner as participants under control conditions when the former group was previously exposed to texts encouraging either afterlife beliefs or an existential quest. Thus, a lowered death-defensiveness despite the awareness of annihilation would support the hypothesis that – at least in some cases – not death itself is at the core of the TMT-process, but rather annihilation paired with existential futility. Further investigations will have to confirm these results.

[1] Rank, O. (1941) Beyond Psychology. Dover, New York.
[2] Becker, E. (1973) The Denial of Death. New York, Free Press.
[3] Florian, V. and Mikulincer M. (1997) Fear of Death and the Judgement of Social Transgressions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 73, 369-380.

