... title: Color vision evaluation based on dynamic intensity adaptation of a tunable light source



Abstract

The group for Integrative and animal physiology at Department of biology of Biotechnical faculty, University of Ljubljana, is investigating the basic mechanisms of perception of color and polarization of the light in insects and in humans. For the purpose of producing defined and controllable stimulation, a light synthesizer was developed. The goal of the project was to implement the device in determination of color sensitivity of cells in insects (ERG, single cell recordings) and sensitivity of the visual system in humans (ERG) [1].
The system consists of an array of 24 light emitting diodes, which cover the wavelength range between 350 and 650 nm. The response of the visual system is recorded for each LED separately. Light adaptation of the cells is avoided by stimulation with pseudorandom spectral sequence which is performed in seconds. Such implementation gives us a possibility to repeat multiple sequences and improve the signal to noise ratio. 
The sequence is driven by an Arduino microcontroller board and a multichannel, pulse width-modulating driver. The array of LED lights is synthesized with a diffraction grating. The intensity of each LED is measured with a calibrated radiospectrometer and adjusted to emit equal photon flux at all wavelengths. The response signal of the visual system is measured with microelectrodes and fed to the second Arduino microcontroller board, filtered and further processed with Fourier transformation to record the real amplitude of stimulus-related frequency components [2]. The difference between the single wavelength response amplitude and the average response is used as a correction factor to adjust the light intensity of LED in the next round of stimulation. The array of correction values for each of 24 LED is sent from the recording microcontroller to the microcontroller driving the LED array via analog output. The process is repeated until the stimulation evokes equal responses at all wavelengths. The number of iterations of corrections is determined empirically. The wavelength dependent correction factors represent the reciprocal spectral sensitivity of the visual system. 
The implemented solution is robust and fast enough to be in actual use. Because of its high spectral resolution our system is unique on current market. The light adaptation could be further reduced with the implementation of the m-sequence; this sequence can be generated using linear feedback shift registers which represents the opportunity for optimization and dynamic, online adjustment of stimulus parameters.

[1] K. Momose and J. Hanagata. "Measurement of human color responses using visual evoked potential elicited by multi-color stimulation". Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 2001. Proceedings of the 23rd Annual International Conference of the IEEE, vol. 1, pp. 964-967, 2001.
[2] M. Gur et al. "Frequency-domain analysis of the human electroretinogram". JOSA, vol. 70, pp. 53-59, 1980.

