... title: Application of Physiological Measures for Evaluation of User Experience: A Skin Conductance Experimental Study



Abstract

Measuring data on the user experience (UX) is important in many ways— for example, web developers, interaction designers and UX researchers may find such data useful in enhancing the information architecture or navigational features of web pages and mobile applications. The need to measure this data as accurately as possible arises, in order to help in the process of creation of more user-friendly web and mobile applications with better findability, accessibility, and easier learnability, from which the most benefit goes to the user, i.e. all of us [1]. It is most common for usability studies to evaluate usability via measures such as completion time, success rate, questionnaires [2]. While most studies resort to these ‘typical’ methods of evaluating an interface’s usability, the subjective nature of the methods generates concerns as to the reliability of the data. On the other hand both, task-performance and subjective measures do not reflect directly the users’ cognitive loads and psychological involvements, and they are not able to explain the related emotional arousal [3]. Consequently, a more objective and efficient methods are needed. In this thesis, we therefore decided to combine typical task-objective measures (completion rate, time needed for finishing tasks) and subjective participant evaluation (task difficulty, intuitiveness of application, etc.) with a physiological approach, particularly measuring the skin conductivity response (SCR). Our main objective within this study is hence to analyze the relationship between physiological measures and traditional usability measures. In order to evaluate the relationships between these measures, we design an experiment with a subsequent correlation analysis. We investigate whether skin conductance response is effective in identifying specific emotions in users’ interactions with a web application, and examine if skin conductivity measures can enrich or support traditional usability metrics. Our hypothesis is that we will find correlations in a manner that reflects that with worse task-related results (longer time needed for completing tasks, number of clicks) and more negative self-evaluation data (difficult task, unusable interface, etc.), higher levels of skin conductance levels will be observed.

## References
[1] L. Yao, Y. Liu, and X. Sun, “Using Physiological Measures to Evaluate User Experience of Mobile Applications,” Engineering Psychology and Cognitive Ergonomics Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 301–310, 2014.
[2] P. Foglia, C. A. Prete, and M. Zanda, “Relating GSR Signals to traditional Usability Metrics: Case Study with an anthropomorphic Web Assistant,” 2008 IEEE Instrumentation and Measurement Technology Conference, 2008.
[3] T. Lin, M. Omata, W. Hu, and A. Imamiya, “Do physiological data relate to traditional usability indexes?,” In Proceedings of the 17th Australia conference on Computer-Human Interaction. pp. 1-10, 2015.

