... title: A Critical Replica of Diana Deutsch's auditory Octave Illusion



Abstract

In 1974 Deutsch published her auditory illusions for the first time in Nature, among them the famous „octave Illusion“[1]. One conclusion drawn from her paper was that the constructed dichotic tonal sequence was perceived differently among people, very little of them hearing the actually presented sound sequence. Moreover, there was the hypothesis of lateralization dependent perception of the illusion, which was found in a significant correlation between handedness and percept. Our aim is to take this experiment one step further, investigating on the effects of the interval size on the illusion. It has been shown that cochlear processing of auditory input cleaves the incoming signal into “critical bandwidths”. Our hypothesis is, that within those critical bandwidths the illusionary effect diminishes due to less antagonistic processing of pitch and localization. This can be achieved changing the interval of the stimulus to a “forth” – and a “major second”- illusion.
 As unaccompanied questionnaire dependent investigations are shown to be insufficient for determination of handedness [3] we additionally used a tapping method to determine handedness in a motoric test battery [4]. This tapping test builds on the right shift theory of Anett[5], stating that there is a dominant allele in the human genome, coding for right lateralization. Individuals lacking that “Right-Factor” are suggested to operate more bilateral and to choose freely their preferred hemisphere in motoric tasks . Finally, we checked our results with various significance tests and compared them to the original study, which consolidated different lateralization dependent perception of stimuli not in one critical bandwidth (1 and 2), however, there was no such significant difference with stimuli in one critical bandwidth (3). (1= octave, 2 = fourth, 3 = major second)
METHODS
In this replica of Diana Deutsch’s Octave Illusion experiment we tested the effect with 2 altered stimuli, varying in interval and therefore in critical band width on 171 Caucasian subjects. For categorization of handedness, Varney & Benton’s, questionnaire was used[2]. 
Synthesized sinus waves with a difference of 400 Hz (1: 400 Hz, 2: 800 Hz, Octave interval) were presented via headphones, alternatingly changing sides. The identical sequence is simultaneously played to both ears at a rate of 250 ms (4 times a second).
RESULTS
The test resulted in not significant differences between the perceptions of left- and right-handed participants (chi-square = 3.34 /N = 171/ p = 0.341), in contrast to Deutsch, who found significant differences (chi-square = 6.8 / N = 86 / p (smaller than) 0.05)
Presumably, the drastically unequal ratio of left- and right-handed participants in the replication is responsible for this (r-hand: 70 %, l-hand: 17 %, 13% excluded). Calculating the effect size w = sqrt(chi-square/N), we found that Deutsch had an effect of medium size(w = 0.28), whereas our results yielded a small effect size(w = 0.14)
Analyzing the correlation of stimuli interval and perceived localization, we found the following:
--------------Octave		Fourth		Major-Second
Chi-square	59.462		41.000		11.215
Asymptotic 
significance0.000		0.000		0.01
Effect size 	0.55		        0.46		         0.24
In our results, in contrast to Deutsch, handedness had no significant influence on the localization of all three stimuli. The strongest of those weak correlations was the major second interval. Also the order of presenting the questionnaire for handedness and musical perception had no significant effects on localization of sounds (p = 0.145, w =0.1)
DISCUSSION
Our hypothesis is that the perceptual localization effects of the octave illusion found by Deutsch change if the presented stimuli are in one critical bandwidth. The reason for this assumption is that auditory signals in the cochlea are processed within one critical bandwidth and therefore, pitch related and localization related mechanisms might be less antagonistic. The data suggests a tendency for this hypothesis: the bigger the interval, the higher the correlation between interval and perceived localization, the less probability for the null hypothesis( low p value).
In respect of future experiments the following parameters could be adapted or added:
a)	A Proportional amount of right- and left-handed participants 
As mentioned in the results, the unbalanced ratio of participants could have lead to little effect size and insignificant results. This clearly needs to be avoided in the future.
b)	A modification of operationalization
The questionnaires used were not at the latest scientific state of the art.  This was intentional, as we wanted to replicate the exact settings of Deutsch with supplementary tapping and stimuli. Some of the questions of Varney & Benton are outdated, e.g. what is your sewing hand or misleading, e.g. with which hand do you hold tennis racket (most of the clear right-handed participants crossed out “both hands” as they probably thought of a backhand strike which eventually lead to their exclusion in the rigorous min 9 of 10 inventory categorization). In addition, there were too many experimenters. Four conducted the main experiment with tapping (N =100) and about 20 experimenters (about 5 participants per experimenter) conducted the light version with only the handedness inventory and the three acoustic stimuli. This obviously raises confounding variables, with each experimenter giving different instructions. A solution to this would be an automatic test procedure.
c)	A more directional hypothesis
The hypothesis we made possibly was not strong enough for showing significant results.  A presumably stronger hypothesis would be:  Binaural Stimuli similar to Deutsch’s octave illusion with frequency in one critical bandwidth significantly decrease the lateral dominant location perception due to less antagonistic effects in cochlear processing.

[1] Deutsch, D. (1974). An auditory illusion. Nature, 251, 307‐309.
More information can be found under: 
http://deutsch.ucsd.edu/psychology/deutsch_research2.php
[2] Varney, N. R. & Benton, A. L. (1975). Tactile perception of direction in relation to handedness and familial handedness. Neuropsychologia 13, 449‐454.
[3] Kopiez, R., Galley, N. & Lehmann, A. (2010). The relation between lateralisation, early start of training, and amount of practice in musicians: A contribution to the problem of handedness classification. Laterality, 15(4), 385‐414.
[4] Tapping Version 1.4 copyright 2006 MediTECH Electronic GmbH 
[5] Annett, M. (1985). Left, right, hand and brain: The right shift theory. Hove, UK: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc.

