... title: The influence of sleep deprivation on cognitive functions of human



Abstract

We are confronted with the influence of sleep deprivation in many situation of our everyday life. Like in work when the deadline for our work is approaching and we working at the expense of dormancy. I was interested how sleep deprivation can influence our performance and if it is not only a subjective feeling of fatigue after one night without sleep.
	I have been looking for some studies on the Internet and I always found only papers focused on some specific area, like the study: Sustained attention performance during sleep deprivation (Doran, 2001), but I did not find any more complex study. Therefore I got the idea to make my own experiment which will include psychological tests which will measure the influence of sleep deprivation on various cognitive areas (memory, perception, attention and mental imaginary).
The work can be divided into two phases: preparation and testing.
	In the first phase it was necessary to choose which tests will be suitable for this experiment. Tests should be simple for understanding and should afford clearly measurable results. Time required for testing should be relatively short because the effect of sleep deprivation could be amplified by the effect of fatigue from long time monotonous work. The test has the advantage that you can vary the difficulty of the task. As an inspiration for choosing suitable tests was online program CogLab 2.0 (Francis, 2007). There are a lot of tests divided on the basic categories according cognitive functions. It made easier to find suitable tests for the experiment. Finally I chose these tests: change detection (there are presented two pictures in sequence. The second one could be the same or similar picture with a small difference. The task was to say if are the pictures same or not), mental rotation (participant see two objects presented side by side and the task was to say if the right object is only rotated image of the left one or it is rotated and mirrored), memory span (on the screen is presented sequence of string of various length. The task is to repeat this sequence in the right order), reaction time test (The task is say as fast as possible to which of two possible states switched an object on the picture), signal detection (on the screen are presented stars on random positions. Between this random randomly deployed stars could be adjusted sequence of ten stars. The task was to answer if the adjusted sequence if presented). On the internet there are a lot of programs for this tests but I did not want to use already created programs because I wanted to add my own ideas for improving tests. From this reason I decided to program my own tests  what enabled me to set all parameters as I needed and I could better incorporate the requires which I set for this experiment. Before I could start programming the tests I had to create all necessary pictures for the tests. Then I programmed the tests one by one.
	Testing phase of the experiment was done on a group of participants. I tested the influence of sleep deprivation using created tests. The testing started always twelve hours after participant woke up and was repeated each six hours. In this experiment the participants was tested for 36 hours of total sleep deprivation (no sleep for the whole time). Each testing included all five tests. The average time for one testing was from 20 to 30 minutes in dependency how fast participants were with their answers.
	From the analysis of the data acquired from the testing phase we could see that the effect of sleep deprivation was different for each test. In the results from change detection test and mental rotation test we could see increased reaction time which was necessary for the task. In the results from signal detection test we could see the increased measure of incorrect answers. From the results of reaction time test we could see the time of the day dependency. This effect was stronger as influence of sleep deprivation and participants had better reaction times after 30 hours of sleep deprivation when they was tested at 2pm as was their times at 2am (18 hours of sleep deprivation). Memory span test shows no significant changes in results during the whole experiment. From this results we can see that memory is more robust against sleep deprivation as other tested cognitive functions of humans.
	I have created a set of tests which could be used for testing in similar experiments. I successfully showed the influence of sleep deprivation on most of tested cognition functions. The results shows correlation of reactions times, time of the day when the test was done and effect of sleep deprivation in all tests where were measured the reactions times for most of the participants.



References:

1. 	Sternberg, R. J. 2002: Cognitive psychology. Wadsworth Publishing, Belmont, Massachusetts. ISBN-0155085352.

2.	Kosslyn, S. M., Osherson, D. N. 1995: Visual cognition. The MIT Press Cambridge, Massachusetts. ISBN  0-262-65045-2. 

3.	Doran, S. M., Van Dongen, H. P. A., Dinges, D. F. 2001: Sustained attention performance during sleep deprivation: Evidence of state instability. In archives italiennes de Biologie, 139: 253-267 [online]. [2010-4-8]. URL:


