... title: The Phenomenology of Habit Formation and its Connection to Body-­Mind Centering



Abstract

In this project, I investigate the concept of habit and its development in embodied cognitive science. I look at various notions of habit in the so-called “organicist trend” [1]. According to the understanding of this trend, habit is intimately involved in the constitution of meaningfulness through inherent corporeal intentionality. This holistic, ecological, notion of habit offers a framework where the organism is seen as an inseparable unity of body and mind, a view that the classical cognitivist paradigm fails to acknowledge.
I provide examples of habit formations and discuss them from a phenomenological perspective. The examples are taken from the practice of Body-Mind Centering (BMC). BMC is a multidisciplinary experiential somatic movement school, mostly based on anatomy, physiology, psychology, and movement developmental studies [2]. During the practice of BMC one gains awareness of a wide range of bodily sensations from all the anatomical structures and tissues of the body. BMC claims that the patterns formed by the mind are manifested in the patterns of the body and therefore our bodily movements are reflections of the movements of the mind. I critically assess this claim and offer a comparative analysis of the differences in the understanding of habit in cognitive science and in BMC.
The examples of habit formation support my hypothesis: the movement developmental aspects of BMC resemble the vision of constructive phenomenology [3]. BMC aims to go back to the first experiences of movement and then travel through all the developmental stages of the organisation of movement with increasing complexity and re-experiencing these stages as adults. With this increased movement awareness, BMC re-educates developmental patterns, as a therapeutic means, in other words, it re-forms fundamental habitual movements. Similarly, constructive phenomenology aims to gain a foundational understanding of the origin of habit by a regressive inquiry into ontogenetic life. Therefore, I argue that BMC might be a promising candidate for an application in a constructive phenomenological investigation, adding a new perspective to this field, along with the results of infant developmental psychology research. I also assess whether the attitude of the practice of BMC can indeed be considered as a phenomenological attitude.

!!Acknowledgements

Special thanks to Elisabeth Zimmermann for supervising this project.

!!References

[1] X. E. Barandiaran and E. A. Di Paolo, “A genealogical map of the concept of habit.,” Front. Hum. Neurosci., vol. 8, no. July, 2014, pp. 1-7-
[2] B. B. Cohen, Sensing, Feeling, and Action. The Experiential Anatomy of Body-Mind Centering. 3rd ed. Contact Editions, 2012.
[3] M. Sheets-Johnstone, “On learning to move oneself: A constructive phenomenology” in The Primacy of Movement - Expanded 2nd ed. John Benjamins Publishing Company, 2011, pp. 193-236.

