... title: Age-dependent Memory Decline: A Pathological or Sociological Trait?



Abstract

It is well established that around 50 years onwards episodic and working memory usually diminish their performance while semantic memory operates without significant impairments [1]. It has been argued that memory-aging patterns and in particular, memory deficits could represent an evolutionary adaptation. Despite adult memory models (e.g., Alan Baddeley and Elvin Tulving) being well known, there is little research, from an evolutionary perspective, on their application to old age memory loss. This paper argues that elderly people may be selectively predisposed to preserve old memories to the detriment of a neurobiological weakening of new memories. A literature research in academic databases was carried out until May 2017 to identify reports that examine human memory during old age from an evolutionary perspective. Twenty-two reports were identified and included for analysis. Main findings indicate that in order to increase human life span it was necessary for individuals to conserve an adequate cognitive performance [2]. During the evolution of the modern Homo sapiens, those elders with a preserved semantic memory would have contributed significantly to their group´s survival [1], [2]. Acquired cultural knowledge in addition to personal experiences could have been successfully passed on to their younger kin, thereby establishing an ongoing process of accumulation and transmission of knowledge over many generations. However, episodic and working memory suffer from age-related impairments during the encoding and retrieving of new information. Neuropathology often starts in the entorhinal cortex and the hippocampal formation, spreading from there to association cortical areas. During advanced age, appropriate functioning of these other memory types would not have been essential for survival, as older people would have received assistance from younger members of the tribe. From an evolutionary perspective, memory deficits should not be regarded exclusively as a negative biological trait but could also be seen as key factors in the evolution of stable long-term social structures. It is proposed that taking into consideration evolutionary and social aspects could contribute to a better understanding of differential degrees of aging-related deterioration of human memory faculties.

!!Key words: human aging; semantic memory; inclusive fitness; evolution 
!!References
[1] L. L. Carstensen and C. E. Löckenhoff, ¨Aging, emotion, and evolution¨, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., vol. 1000, no. 1, pp. 152–179, Dec. 2003.
[2] J. S. Allen, J. Bruss, and H. Damasio, ¨The aging brain: The cognitive reserve hypothesis and hominid evolution¨, Am. J. Hum. Biol., vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 673–689, Oct. 2005.

