... title: Approaching User Experience: Moving between Modelling and In-Depth



Abstract

!!!! Approaching User Experience: Moving between Modelling and In-Depth

!! Introduction
User experience (UX) research in the field of Human-Computer Interaction tries
to understand how humans experience the interaction with technological artefacts
(e.g. mobile phones). This field of research is quite young and there is significant debate
about what the concept is and how to research it. Two movements are competing against
each other: Hassenzahl’s model of UX [1] and McCarthy & Wright’s framework of experience
centred design [2]. Hassenzahl stays grounded in cognitive psychology and focuses on
uncovering the objective in the subjective, on the precise and the formal. McCarthy & Wright
take a humanist approach, stress the ambiguous and suggest to live with the subjectivity that
is inherent in the concept of UX. Only few studies try to integrate both views. This
situation in UX is not unique. A discussion between first person and third person
approaches also happens in other disciplines (e.g. cognitive science) and there are
efforts to integrate both perspectives with each other.

!! Method
I am trying to compare both approaches by using them in the user evaluation of a website with
two user groups, one for each method. Despite comparing results (type of data, what has been
discovered and missed out & why) I also reflect on conducting both approaches.
This includes looking at required knowledge & skill, training, preparations, difficulty of
recruiting participants and time exposure of conduction & analysis. A focus group with
the clients of the evaluation also tries to incorporate their view and answer the question
what type of data & which results are most helpful for them.

!! Results
Results suggest that Hassenzahl's model is easy to employ, gives a broad overview and results
are easy to visualise. But its results have to be classified into practical relevant categories
and detailed explanations are missing. On the other hand, the method based on
McCarthy & Wright's framework provides detailed and informative insights, but its results
do not generalise easily. It is at least twice as costly to employ than the model and requires
a skilled researcher.

!! Conclusion
Regarding methods, Hassenzahl's model misses context information and the here used Descriptive
Experience Sampling should be easier to employ. Generally, a methodological stance should
not be emphasised too much and an integrated view from different perspectives seems to
be more valuable than a unified view. In UX research there should be a more pragmatic use
of methodologies. They should be viewed as tools with strengths and weaknesses that are
able to advance knowledge when used appropriately.

!! References
[1] M. Hassenzahl, "Experience design: technology for all the right reasons" in Synthesis Lectures on Human-Centered Informatics, vol. 3, pp. 1-95, 2010.
[2] P. Wright and J. McCarthy, "Experience-Centered Design: Designers, Users, and Communities in Dialogue" in Synthesis Lectures on Human-Centered Informatics, vol. 3, pp. 1-123, 2010.

