... title: Evaluation of the national program of politics of nutrition 2005-10 and preparation of recommendations for the national program of politics of nutrition 2011-2020



Abstract

Institution: Institute of Public Health of Republic of Slovenia - Mojca Gabrijelcic Blenkus, Matej Gregorcic, Vida Fajdiga Turk

Introduction: Inappropriate eating habits, unhealthy life style and obesity are linked to numerous chronic diseases in today's society and they present a heavy financial burden to the national health fund.

The plan for a systematic reduction of state budget expenses intended for treating the consequences of chronic non-contagious diseases (obesity, hypertension, diabetes type II, several types of cancers, etc.) incorporates the National Program of Politics of Nutrition (NPPN) 2005-2010, which is the result of collaborative work of many experts and planners of the politics of nutrition over several years.

The main objectives of NPPP are:

- gathering knowledge and human resources for an evaluation of the national politics of nutrition at the Institute of Public Health of Republic of Slovenia

- performing an internal evaluation and determining the basis for an external evaluation of NPPN 2005-2010;

- defining the range of the goals of NPPN (information inquiry, detailed interviews)

- setting the starting-point for the preparation of NPPN 2011-2020 on the basis of the results of the evaluation.

Our suggestion for the starting-point of NPPN 2011-2020 is to first determine the inappropriate mental-behavioral patterns as the source of inappropriate eating habits by an empirical pilot research. Gathered results would be compared with the modern findings of neuronutrition with the goal of improving the eating habits and indirectly lower the levels of the depressive response of the individuals.

We suggest that at the starting-point of NPPN 2011-2020 we should define, by an empirical pilot research, the inappropriate mental-behavioral patterns as the source of unhealthy eating habits. The gathered results should be compared with the contemporary scientific findings of neuronutrition with the aim to improve the subjects' eating habits and indirectly lower the levels of the depressive response of the individuals.

At the end of the evaluation report of the NRP 2005-2010, we suggest an one year quantitative-qualitative research be made in order to approval or reject the following hypotheses- whether the use of modern neuronutricionist findings contributes to a person's overall well-being.

Methodological approach: We will be using the quantitative-qualitative method with partially structured questionnaires, among the adult population of 100 randomly selected participants, in different regions in the age range age between 30 and 55 years.

The clinical focus of the research involves the measurement of serum cortisol levels.

The results will be obtained from the comparison of the values before the beginning and after the completion of the one year research.

Conclusion: The fundamental purpose of our research is to incorporate the newest scientific findings of neuronutrition and set the guidelines for lessening the inappropriate eating habits with the intention of improving/preserving the psychophysical public health in modern living conditions.

Sources:
Nutritional Neuroscience by Harris Lieberman, Robin B. Kanarek, Chandan Prasad: CRC Press 2005.
Neuronutricionizam - Prehrana prema emocijama. Sandi Krstinic: Vebl commerc, 2009.
http://www.gzs.si/pripone/27167/1-Policnik.pdf

