... title: !!!! Bottom-up vs. top-down influence on attention capture by subliminal stimuli



Abstract

!!!!Bottom-up vs. top-down influences on attention capture by subliminal stimuli

Is attention and consciousness the same? Do they serve the same function or are they different?  These are intriguing questions both from a philosophical as well as from an empirical viewpoint. It is now commonly accepted that some part of attention operates independent of awareness. An ongoing debate however addresses the question if unconscious (subliminal) attention capture is in general top-down contingent – that is, if the stimuli have to fit the voluntary control setting – or if it is stimulus driven (bottom-up). Recent empirical evidence from spatial cueing studies has been interpreted in favor of the latter position [1,2]. In these studies, particular locations in the visual scene were cued by subliminal stimuli, and, when subjects had to perform a Go/No-go task, it was shown that the cued locations were attended – that is, reacting to targets at cued locations was facilitated relative to reacting to targets at uncued locations (cueing effect).  It was argued that this attention capture was bottom-up because the cues were highly salient and not predictive for the target location. However, the interpretation of the data is problematic. Namely, subsequent experiments already revealed that changing the task by showing distractors in addition to the target disrupts the cueing effect [2]. Although this finding had initially been interpreted in terms of the neurophysiological properties of the neuronal projection from the retina to the Superior Colliculi which is hypothetically underlying bottom-up subliminal attention capture [3], it is not a far-fetched alternative interpretation that the subliminal cue actually was top-down contingent in the original setting, but no longer after changing the task condition. 
The objective of the current project is to rule out this alternative. Two experiments are designed in which we systematically change the task and, hence, the top-down setting in the paradigm of Mulckhuyse et al. [1]. By using color distractors in addition to the color target, we rule out if top-down singleton search is a better explanation for the cueing effects that were observed when color targets were used without distractors [2]. Also, we no longer use a Go/No-go task and the luminance of the colors is psychophysically equated to the background. This is to rule out that individual differences in color-luminance perception evoked residual contrast responses and were responsible for some of the results in the previous experiments [2]. If the bottom-up effect is real, we would expect to find cueing effects regardless of the task condition and eventually dependent on whether the color stimuli are psychophysically or objectively luminance-equated to the background. 

!! References:
[1] M. Mulckhuyse, J. Theeuwes. "Unconscious attentional orienting to exogenous cues: a review of the literature." Acta Psychologica, vol. 134, pp. 299-309, Jul. 2010.
[2] M. Mulckhuyse, D. Talsma, J. Theeuwes. "Grabbing attention without knowing: Automatic capture of attention by subliminal spatial cues." Journal of Vision, vol. 7, no. 9, article 1081, Sep. 2007.
[3] I. Fuchs, U. Ansorge. "Unconscious cueing via the Superior Colliculi: Evidence from Searching for Onset and Color Targets." Brain Sciences, vol. 2, pp. 33-60, Feb. 2012.

