... title: Cognitive Processes in Creative Aha-experiences



Abstract

Within the interdisciplinary field of creative cognition, researchers are trying to identify cognitive processes and structures that constitute creative acts [1]. A further goal is to identify which cognitive processes are underling creative acts, using different methods from the interdisciplinary field of Cognitive Science. In that sense, the creative cognition approach aspires to create a better understanding of creativity as well as new methods that enable and facilitate creative acts [2]. Inspired by the interdisciplinary research of the creative cognition approach, this master thesis addresses the question of how creative Aha-Experiences are emerging and what different phases they consist of. An Aha-Experiences can be described as “A sudden comprehension that solves a problem, reinterprets a situation, explains a joke, or resolves an ambiguous percept…” [3]. In this regard I argue that successful creative processes, which are resulting in new ideas and products, follow procedures which necessarily include creative Aha-Experiences.
Besides a general review of the current stance of cognitive theories about creativity with a specific focus on the creative cognition approach, my thesis is mainly based on the data that is collected from interviews with 25 people that are pursuing a creative profession. Therefore I will interview designers, artists, musicians, photographers and architects. The creative professionals are interviewed about personal, creative Aha-Moments that they experienced during creative work. Although creative Aha-Experiences are also experienced by other professional groups, the research is restricted to creative professions because professional creatives face the constant need to create new work and therefore seek for Aha-Experiences and new ideas frequently. Therefore they are highly experienced in having creative Aha-Moments, which makes them eminently suitable for my investigations. The used method for the interviews is called “Elicitation Interview technique“ [4] and originates from the field of empirical phenomenology. This technique is designed to enable the interviewer to get access to conscious and pre-conscious cognitive processes of the interviewee. In that sense the goal of the interviews is to find out how creative insight processes are experienced and which circumstances enable or facilitate them. The scope of the master’s thesis is to develop a phase model of creative Aha-Experiences that comprises the findings from the empirical, phenomenological research and incorporates possible similarities with interdisciplinary research from the field of creative cognition. The phase model should ideally work as a generalized overview of Aha-Experiences. Additionally, I am trying to find out which circumstances are generally beneficial for creative ideas, adding a rather practical perspective to my thesis.

[1] R. A. Finke, S. M. Smith, and T. B. Ward, Creative cognition: theory, research, and applications. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997.
[2] T. B. Ward, R. A. Finke, and S. M. Smith, The creative cognition approach. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997.
[3] J. Kounios, M. Beemann, “The Aha! Moment. The cognitive Neuroscience of Insight“, Current Directions in Psychological Science, vol 18, no. 4, pp. 2010-2016, 2009. Available: 
http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1467-8721.2009.01638.x [Accessed May, 2018]
[4] C. Petitmengin, "Describing one’s subjective experience in the second person: An interview method for the science of consciousness", Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, vol. 5, no. 3-4, pp. 229-269, 2006.

