... title: Logical cognitive analysis of legal reasoning



Abstract

Legal reasoning is an interesting combination of logic, work with logical rules and human reasoning, influenced by different aspects of human cognition on the other side. I tried to analyze this process from a different perspective, with a background in computer science and artificial intelligence. So far, attempts to formalize some processes in legal reasoning were done by various authors. However, there is not much material on concrete principles and processes of legal reasoning, which consists not only of formalizable rules, but is influenced by many other factors.

Legal reasoning is a process of making decisions, based on available facts and rules from the legal system. These are always incomplete and different conclusions are derivable from them, depending on the process of their analysis. Some parts of legal reasoning are purely logical, however most of them are also influenced by the human side of people involved in this process. This is an analysis of legal reasoning, description of the observable process of legal argumentation and influences on the final results of that process. 

People, doing legal reasoning, make decisions about problems, based on norms in a form of rules. These rules were formed throughout the history based on experience, ethics, cultural background and many different influences, which are all product of human cognition. Let's see what the legal reasoning means. The process of legal reasoning consists of 4 parts through time line. At the beginning, issue must be selected and described by facts and circumstances. Then the legal rules are chosen. This choice is based on matching the rule to the case. Rule is always decomposed to the elements, which are compared, if they match the case. Question is, what elements of the rule must be proved for accepting the rule? Rules also tend to have a set of exceptions, so it must be considered, if the case does not match any of them, what would cause denial of rule application. Third and the most important part of the legal reasoning is analysis. Here the actual comparing the facts to the rules happens and it is based on skills, rule knowledge and fact knowledge of people making the analysis. These properties make legal reasoning uncertain, because the same cause can be decided the opposite way, if the skills, rule and fact knowledge of people making the decision is different. Last part is conclusion. Decision is based on analysis and the result is a binary statement, if rule applies to the facts, or it does not. As previously mentioned, the decision is always biased by previous analysis. We will mostly cover the analytic part of the process, as it is a process of human reasoning, human cognition and as such, is an interesting phenomenon for analysis.

The core of my work describes handling of preferences in legal argumentation, what influences preferences in picking rules in argumentation, what is reasonable, what can be described or even formalized in a language of logic, and what on the other hand may seem as chaotic, unpredictable or against common sense. Second group is mentioned in the context of influences on first group of preference principles, because we cannot yet validly measure, how much impact they really have on the process and the result. This work is a cognitive analysis, because we try to figure out the connection between human reasoning about legal cases on one side and logic, potentially capable of doing similar work with its abilities on the other side. 

In legal system, some conflicts between rules exist. They are of two types. First one appeared during the process of creation and continuous updating of this system. It is a conflict and inconsistency inside the legal system. Some common sense techniques, how to handle these conflicts exist and we will try to describe and formulate them. We will formulate a process of picking the right rules, based on evaluating priorities and preferences for these rules. Second type of conflicts are conflicts in reasoning about the case. Each arguing side tries to use rules, which when interpreted in an desirable way for that side, can propose different solutions to the problem, sometimes even opposite. This depends on concrete interpretation of the rules and value rankings of the opposing sides. We will cover also the preferences picking for this type of reasoning.

References:

[1]Walton, D. Legal argumentation and evidence. Pennsylvania State University Press, University Park, PA, 2002. 

[2]Leite, J. A. and Alferes, J. J. and Pereira, L. M. Multi-dimensional Logic Programming, Technical Report, Dept. de Informatica, Faculdade de Ciencias e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, 2001.

[3]Prakken, H. 1993. A logical framework for modelling legal argument. In Proceedings of the 4th international Conference on Artificial intelligence and Law (Amsterdam, The Netherlands, June 15 - 18, 1993). ICAIL '93. ACM, New York, NY, 1-9.

