... title: Experiential Transitions of Waking, Sleep and Lucid Dreaming



Abstract

!!Introduction
The experiential world of sleep and sleep onset has so far received little attention. During the process of falling asleep, we pass through consecutive transitional conscious states. Subjects often report hypnagogic imagery and a progressive loss of awareness of the external world. Other subjective experiences of moving towards sleep include the loss of control over one's thoughts and thought processes, the loss of reality orientation and a loss of time perception [1]. 
Conversely, the experience of deep and dreamless sleep can be explained as pure temporal experience. It is characterized only by the subjective experience of time, the phenomenal now and the sense of duration, but devoid of any further intentional content, such as perceptual objects or events [2]. 

!!Aim and Research Design
My endeavour is to shine further light on the phenomenological features of sleep experience and dreamless sleep. The focus will be on the transition from being aware to being unaware, more specifically the change from being awake to being asleep and what this tells us about the nature of consciousness. 
In addition to observing the time spent during falling asleep and waking up, I am going to concentrate on the experiences of lucid dreamers, particularly on the change in the structure of experience during an experiential shift from lucid dreaming to lucid dreamless sleep. The participants will be given the instruction to report their experience immediately upon awakening by focusing on any type of feeling or qualitative state they have experienced prior to awakening. The goal is to direct their attention towards the felt qualities or phenomenal character of awareness itself [3].
The reporting technique will consist of home diaries following spontaneous awakenings. Other possible ways of reporting the experience will also be in the form of a drawing or any other kind of visual presentation of the experience. Later in short temporal proximity I will carry out in-depth phenomenological interviews with the participants. The aim is a phenomenological enrichment and refinement of the current understanding of sleeping experience, waking and dreamless sleep. The purpose is to try and expand sleep research to include dreamless sleep experience and try to do a preliminary outline of what the experiences entail.

!!References 
 [1] L. Goupil and T. A. Bekinschtein. "Cognitive processing during the transition to sleep," . Archives italiennes de biologie, vol. 150, no. 02-03, 2011, pp. 140-154.
[2] J. M. Windt, "Just in Time — Dreamless Sleep Experience as Pure Subjective Temporality", Open MIND. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group. vol. 37, 2015, pp. 1-34.
[3] E. Thompson, “Dreamless Sleep , the Embodied Mind , and Consciousness The Relevance of a Classical Indian Debate to Cognitive Science,” Open MIND. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group. vol. 37, 2015, pp. 1-19.

