... title: Non-verbal Cognitive Dysfunction in Children with Specific Language Impairment



Abstract

Background: Language deficits occur in a series of developmental disorders and are widely recognized as characteristic symptoms of a range of developmental clinical conditions. In fact, Specific Language Impairment (hereafter SLI) is currently defined as a significant impairment of the child's linguistic abilities on several levels (phonology, morphology, lexical, syntax, narrative) by the presence of non-verbal IQ scores in the normal range; the diagnosis is based on a set of inclusionary and exclusionary criteria including performance at least one standard deviation below age expectations on a generic language assessment but 'normal' non-verbal intelligence. Of course, the term 'normal' non-verbal intelligence raises issues about what constitutes a 'normal' non-verbal IQ in a-/typical development and must be handled with care. However, according to the classical definition (ICD-10-GM version 2009; F80.- 'Umschriebene Entwicklungsstorungen des Sprechens und der Sprache') a child with SLI performs below age expectations on language measures despite having adequate cognitive and sensory skills for typical development with no obvious identifiable cause such as hearing loss, brain injuries or other neurological disorders.
Morphology studies of individuals with developmental language disorders claim reversed asymmetry or symmetry of the planum temporale and the pars triangularis (Wernicke's and Broca's area), yet so far there is no clear evidence that children with SLI have marked anatomical differences from other children in either brain hemisphere. Moreover, some indication suggest a possible genetic link because SLI can be passed down from parents to children - although such a SLI-gene of course hasn't been identified thus far. Hence, the investigations of etiological factors are at a premature and inconclusive stage of inquiry and so far nothing but speculative causes can be mentioned.
To sum up, current literature on SLI hardly defines a language profile as 'typical' for SLI given that the spectrum of the disorder is very broad and yet unclear since in both, academic and clinical practice, the 'specific' characteristics of this developmental impairment have been questioned. After all, the fluidity of the diagnosis, making it difficult to border SLI, should actually be considered an important descriptive aspect, portraying the interactive nature of 'specific' cognitive systems. In fact, this study is motivated by the interest in the extensive issue whether there is a relationship between language impairments and impairments on general levels of nonverbal cognitive skills, as part of the broader question of the nature of language and cognition. 
Thus, the aim of this study is to profile a child's performance across linguistic and cognitive domains, to determine if the domains are similar or discrepant in levels of performance.
Methods: 30 typically developing children and 12 children with SLI between 5;0-9;0 years were tested on both their verbal and non-verbal abilities with respectively two standardized tests each. The children with SLI were all currently in therapy and classified as 'SLI' by their speech and language pathologists. All participants were from South Tyrol or Vienna and therefore German native speakers with dialectical colouring; some had a bilingual background, this fact was of course taken into consideration while analyzing the results.  To 'measure' the child's non-verbal performances level the Raven's Coloured Progressive Matrices (parallel form) and the 'Zahlensymboltest' of the HAWIK-R was used. The Raven's Coloured Progressive Matrices were used to give an indication about the child's (4;9-12;00) non-verbal performance; in each test item, a candidate is asked to identify the missing segment required to complete a larger pattern. 
The verbal abilities were assessed with the German version of the standardized TROG-D (original edition by D.V.M. Bishop,1989; German by Annette V. Fox, 2006) which is used to test a child's (3;0-10;11) general linguistic and grammatical comprehension. However, some items (Set 'R') were discarded since the linguistic construction is not common in the children's dialect and therefore not recognizable by them. As a second test, the first part (forward digit span) of the 'Zahlennachsprechen' of the HAWIK-R assessed the phonological loop of the short term memory, while the second part (backward digit span) not only demands phonological memorizing but also the ability to act upon the shortly memorized item. 
The test battery was reduced to these four items in order to successfully conduct the experiment without losing the child's attentiveness and interest. Each test session lasted for 20-35 minutes circa, depending on the child's accomplishment. In case the child was unable to concentrate or to carry out the given tasks, the experiment was stopped up and the results gained so far were used.
Results: The preliminary results show a slight tendency towards underage-expected performance of the children diagnosed with 'SLI' in non-verbal tests compared to the control group. So far, this research alludes to a range of non-verbal cognitive mechanisms interacting with language and having its implications in delineating the profile of SLI. 
Conclusions: Many of the studies of children with language impairments who do or do not display cognitive impairments are motivated by the interest in the broader issue of the relationship between language and cognition. The extent to which the two domains of language and general cognitive abilities are inherently singular or modular remains unresolved and controversial. However, this work has shown that to a small but noticeable extent the domains of cognition and language can operate as orthogonal dimensions. According to these findings, the definition of SLI as specifically and exclusively linked to language must be revised, since the characteristics of this developmental disorder seem to be wider than first documented.

Keywords: Specific Language Impairment, Cognition, Non-verbal IQ, Developmental Disorder;

References: 
[1]	Leonard L. B. (2000), Children with Specific Language Impairment, Massachusetts, MIT Press paperback edition.
[2]	Bishop D.V.M., L.B. Leonard (2000), Speech and Language Impairments in Children, USA: Psychology Pres.
[3]	Cantwell D.P., L. Baker (1987), Developmental Speech and Language Disorders, Guilford Press.
[4]	Laurie M. Gauger, Linda J. Lombardino, Christiana M. Leonard (1997), Brain Morphology in Children With Specific Language Impairment, Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research Vol.40.

