... title: Treating children with epilepsy



Abstract

TREATING CHILDREN WITH EPILEPSY
Mateja Milharcic

Pediatric Clinic of the University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Slovenia

ABSTRACT
In the second semester of our Master's program in Cognitive Science I started working at the Pediatric Clinic of the University Medical Centre Ljubljana under the mentorship of Dr. Igor Ravnik at the epilepsy ward. There I was introduced to their methods and ways of treating children with epilepsy. Epilepsy(s) come in many different forms or are expressed in different types of seizures. They can produce various cognitive and behavioral changes that vary according to the epilepsy itself, treatment of epilepsy (drugs or surgery), reaction to epilepsy (stigma, social interaction and family dynamics) and also associated brain dysfunction and/or damage. Collaborative work between different professionals in treating the child is essential. The child's overall diagnose is based on the neurologist's, psychologist's diagnoses and the parent's descriptions of the child's functioning. My research is oriented towards exploring this very kind of collaborative work, only to also include the findings of teacher's at the child's school. The aim is to research the correlation between the the clinic's neuropsychological diagnose and the actual functioning of the child with epilepsy at school. Using a case study of a 12 year old boy with temporal and frontal (suspected Rasmussen's Syndrome),  I intend to research the correspondence of the findings of cognitive functioning in the neuropsychological diagnose with the findings of the child's functioning (academic achievements) at school. I will compare these findings in three different critical periods. The neurologist's diagnoses are based on the neurology examination, EEG and MRI results. The psychologist's findings are based on the results of psychological tests, WISC as the most commonly used. The child's functioning at school will be reviewed by examining his achievements and grades from the period when he was diagnosed with epilepsy to the current time. I expect to find results that will ultimately aid educators in teaching children with epilepsy, as well as provide other professionals with an efficient concept of treating children with epilepsy.
My research is still in progress. The extensiveness and complexity of my research demand much more time; complete and conclusive results of such study will not be attained in such short time.   Therefore for the purpose of this scientific poster I will present only the beginning findings - the comparison of the doctor's and psychologist's diagnoses and the child's achievements at school. I expect to find parallel and overlapping findings that help explain and ultimately guide the child's cognitive functioning.
References:
o	Wallace, S. (1996). Epilepsy in Children., UK, London: Chapman & Hall.
o	Besag, F.M.C.  Cognitive and Behavioral Outcomes of Epileptic Syndromes: Implicatiosn for Education and Clinical Practice. Epilepsia. 2006; 47( 2): 119-125.
o	Beghi, M., Cornaggia, C.M., Friegni, B., Beghi, E. Learning Disorders in Epilepsy. Epilepsia. 2006; 47 (2): 14-18.

