... title: The Influence of Alcohol on Music Induced Enjoyment – an Inquiry into the Mechanisms



Abstract

Music induced chills, also known as shivers down the spine or goose pimples, are considered a sign of intense enjoyment. Chills have been researched in the context of musical pleasure, because, despite being a subjective feeling of emotional arousal, they can be observed objectively by measuring changes in psycho- and neurophysiological parameters, such as heart rate, muscle tone, skin conductivity, and hemodynamic activity. Thus far chills are known to correlate with dynamic changes in music, with the onset of the singing voice, with sudden changes in volume, and also with autobiographical factors such as memories [1]. The perception of the above enlisted musical parameters can be attributed to different mechanisms, which have been suggested to underlie music induced emotions such as rhythmic and melodic anticipation, emotional contagion, and memory. Indeed, musical enjoyment, similar to pleasure in general, has been suggested to consist of different processes of wanting & expectation, learning and liking, which can be cognitively, functionally and even neuroanatomically separated [2]. In sum, chills are an indication of musical enjoyment which is manifested as changes in the low-level (e.g. neurotransmitter systems), and high level (e.g. long term memory) processes underlying life sustaining functions, affect and cognition. 
In a previous study, it was shown that the intake of alcohol leads to a reduction of the number of chills indicated behaviourally. Alcohol is a widely consumed psychotropic substance known to impair several cognitive functions by disturbing the encoding and retrieving of information. Also, depending on the given task, on the level of intoxication, and personality, among other factors, alcohol can have behaviourally euphoric and anxiolytic effects. Yet the  neurobiological foundations of the influence of alcohol are complex consisting of direct and indirect modulation of neurotransmitter systems [3]. 
This thesis is a theoretical inquiry discussing the different mechanisms in which alcohol intake interferes music induced enjoyment. By summarizing literature from neuropharmacology and music psychology, it is discussed how alcohol influences the human brain by interfering bottom-up and top-down processes related to cognition and physiology, and how these changes may contribute to the reduced number of chills while inebriated. The main contribution of the thesis is the unification of literature from fields that traditionally have had little dialog. This way the thesis is hoped to contribute to the scientific understanding of how alcohol is used to modulate emotions. A further understanding on the consequences of alcohol intake and its metabolism is considered important when developing treatment of maladaptive alcohol use. 

References

[1]	O. Grewe, R. Kopiez, and E. Altenmüller, “Chills as an indicator of individual emotional peaks,” Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., vol. 1169, pp. 351–354, 2009.
[2]	L. Gebauer, M. L. Kringelbach, and P. Vuust, “Ever-changing cycles of musical pleasure: The role of dopamine and anticipation,” Psychomusicology Music. Mind, Brain, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 152–167, 2012.
[3]	Z. Qi, F. Tretter, and E. O. Voit, “A heuristic model of alcohol dependence,” PLoS One, vol. 9, no. 3, 2014.

