... title: Natural Semantic Metalanguage Framework (NSM): A Novel Approach to Computational Modeling of Cognition and Emotions



Abstract

Conceptualising cognition at large, and emotions in particular, in such a way that would provide us with valuable insights into their very nature has been a long-lasting challenge for science in general. One of the methods that has proven effective in this regard is modeling. A process that allows us to address the complexity of the investigated phenomenon by creating its functional simulacrum, i.e. a model. This model, in turn, represents an "artifact that can be mapped onto a phenomenon that we are having difficulty understanding" [1]. By examining the model, we can test the validity of our conceptualisation and, in this manner, increase our overall comprehension of the phenomenon of interest. 
A class of models that has proven particularly useful in this regard are computational models. That is to say, implementations in the form of functional computer programs powered by specific-purpose architectures. The more multidimensional the underlying architecture is, the more efficient our model and the closer to deciphering the complexity at hand we will be. 
Pursuant to this, the primary (ontological) goal of this study is to introduce one such multidimensional architecture that grounds cognition, and emotions in particular, in a web of linguistic schemata - NSM scripts, formulated in a universal Natural Semantic Metalanguage (NSM). The secondary (epistemic) goal, to provide empirical insights into the intuitiveness of the framework itself with regards to its affective-modeling potential, as well as its potential for modeling cognition at large.
The practical rendition came in the form of a qualitative behavioural study based on a carefully designed questionnaire, aimed at testing the [a] modelling efficacy of the framework & validity of the existent emotion-scripts [pt. I] and [b] intuitiveness of the framework based on participants' self-devised emotion-scripts [pt. II]. Resting on the findings of the study, the ultimate goal is to propose the implementation scenario for a universal affective architecture in the form of a multi-language software - the "NSM cogni-cultural emotion translator".  
Although originally a brainchild of linguistics, the multidimensional character makes the NSM framework [2] highly applicable to other disciplines as well. One such discipline that could benefit profusely from its potentials is also A.I. - domains that deal with computational modeling of cognition and emotions in particular [3]. Implemented in this manner, the NSM framework can be regarded as a linguistic substrate of cognition and emotions. 

!!References 
[1] C. Goddard, “Semantic primes, semantic molecules, semantic templates: Key concepts in the NSM approach to lexical typology,” Lex. Typology, pp. 1–37, 2012.  
[2] M. R. Dawson, Minds and machines. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 2004.   
[3] FröhlichP. Langley, J. E. Laird, and S. Rogers, “Cognitive architectures: Research issues and challenges,” Cogn. Syst. Res., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 141–160, Jun. 2009.

