... title: Influence of Emotional Arousal, Valence of the Program and Commercial Break Placement on the Television Advertisement Effectiveness



Abstract

!!Introduction
    Commercials are a significant part of our life, so we think it is important for us to know how much do they affect us. In my research I examine the influence of the emotional valence of the watched program in a combination with the commercial break placement during the program and thereafter evaluation of the commercial and the product in the commercial by the viewer
[1] According Owolabi (2009) commercial and the evaluation of the commercial and the product presented in the commercial is consitent with felt mood of the viewer. [2] On the other hand Marc Roy (2013) mentions that not only the content of the program can affect the commercial evaluating, but also the break placement, whether the commercial is placed smoothly or abruptly into the program. He found out that participants who experience the abrupt commercial, tend to evaluate the commercial less favourably.

!!Methods    
    I used six different groups for this study. In each group, the participants watched whether negatively charged, positively charged or neutral program and also the commercial break was placed smoothly or abruptly in every program. After that, a questionnaire about the impression of the commercial was administered to the viewers.

!!Results
    Commercial was the most effective in groups with happy program, because their mood was affected by the show and not even the commercial break placement made them feel less interested in the presented product. Groups with sad program had slight decrease in their mood while watching and the commercial break only emphazised that feeling towards the advert. Neutral groups have been deprived with no interest in watching the program, but the sudden change to commercial increased the arousal and therefore the interest in the product. We believe that our research will be useful for the future marketing and we would like to continue exploring in this topic.

!!References
[1] Owolabi, B.,“Effect of Consumers Mood on Advertising Effectiveness”. Europe’s Journal of Psychology, 4/2008, pp. 118-127.
[2] Roy M., “Effects of Commercial Breaks Placement on Television Advertisement Effectiveness”. International Journal of Business and Social Science, 8/2013, pp. 73-79.

