... title: Comprehension of indirect replies



Abstract

Abstract for: Comprehension of indirect replies
My semestral project is from the area of psycholinguistics/pragmatics and
deals with indirect speech act comprehension.
To use language is not only to express propositional content, but also to
perform action. We can promise, bet, threaten,
just by using the right words in the right circumstances. Speech acts
become indirect when a speaker communicates to the hearer more than he
says by relying on their mutually shared knowledge, general powers of
rationality and inference on the part of the hearer (Searle, 1969).
When people engage in dialog, their common goal (according to P.Grice)
is to cooperate to exchange information/ convey meaning. This is done by
respecting Grice's maxims – a set of rules, that interlocutors should
follow. There are 4 maxims; maxim of quality, maxim of
quantity, maxim of relation(relevance maxim) and maxim of manner.
Basically they say, that your reply should be clear, relevant, of
appropriate length and you should believe, that what you are saying is
true.
When people talk they often violate these rules and express their intended
meaning indirectly.
Indirect speech is often used in order to ensure plausible
deniability, negotiate relationships or save speakers face. Plausible
deniability means that proposition we make can be understood, but
when listener does not want to cooperate, we can possibly deny we made
one. Negotiating relationship occurs when we meet someone and we do
not have established relationship. We try to communicate in a way that
is not disrespectful and somehow suggesting we are in some way
superior. Saving face means not to lose reputation or respect of other
people.
Holtgraves(1999) studied comprehension of indirect replies that
violated Grice's relevance maxim. We used first experiment from his
paper to inspire our research. His hypothesis was that comprehension
of an indirect reply will facilitate sentence verification. Sentence
verification happens when the sentence is presented and we have to
judge if it is valid grammatical sentence or not. Verification should
be facilitated when target sentence is direct interpretation of
meaning indirect reply conveyed.
The experimental stimuli consisted of short dialogs. In the first few
sentences author described relationship between conversational
partners and the situation in which dialog occured. Each description was
followed by a question and an answer. When the answer was indirect and
the target sentence was its direct interpretation, the time the
decision took was measured and compared to time when maxim was not
violated or target sentence was neutral.
Our adaptation of the experiment will have altered method and stimuli,
it will be done using Slovak language.
Final product of my semestral project will be an experiment(Java
application), which will be used for our future research.

References:
1. Pinker, S., Nowak M. A., & Lee J. J. (2008).  The logic of indirect speech. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 105(3), 833-838. 
2. Holtgraves, T. M. (1999). Comprehending indirect replies: when and how are their conveyed meanings activated? Journal of
Memory and Language, 41, 519–540.

