... title: Enhancing Human or Rather Not?



Abstract

!! Enhancing Human or Rather Not?

!! Why Does It Matter?
The future human-enhancements does not only mean the superhuman powers for the rich people, easier life for the disabled ones and better tomorrow for everyone. The side effects of such technologies will have an impact on the whole society, not only on the enhanced but also on the unenhanced ones. With all these possibilities, an important question arises: Should we allow this to happen? The opinions differ from radically conservative and against any "unnatural" changes, to extremely liberal ones allowing a people to make any modifications that they desire. As for the "middle path" between strict regulation and individual liberty, many important pros and cons are discussed and judged [1].

!! An Enhancement or a Common Tool?
What is an enhancement and what is not? Will there be a reason to distinguish a watch on our wrist and an implant with the same functions on the same wrist? There may be many arguments referring to „unnatural“ enhancing, but some of the functions have became part of our everyday lives and their influence is already present, no matter the device. However, not all of such improvements are as innocent as they may seem. For example, using a common digital camera in certain places can be banned much easier than a special smart contact lenses with a build-in camera, when they will also be used as an replacement for the glasses. Also, the line between cures or replacements that are necessary for some patients and the subjective enhancement within "healthy" people can be really thin: a medication called Ritalin used by patients with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder also works as a cognitive enhancer in healthy subjects [2].

!! Classification
Clearly, there is no easy way to tell right from wrong. All we can do is to take the risks and benefits into consideration and confront them with our moral values. There are many categories of an enhancement that may be discussed separately, such as internal and external tools, temporal or permanent, devices critical for a normal functioning (such as prostheses after a limb loss) and those which we can add by choice (for example a mechanical heart created to eliminate the heart diseases [3] instead of the one we have, no matter if healthy or not), chemical (or organic based) substances vs. electronic devices etc. With clear division, we can review the various arguments in a whole different way.

!! References
[1] F. Allhoff, P. Lin, J. Steinberg, "Ethics of human enhancement: an executive summary", in: Science and engineering ethics, vol. 17, issue 2, June 2011, pp. 201-212.
[2] N. Bostrom and A. Sandberg, "Cognitive enhancement: methods, ethics, regulatory challenges", in: Science and engineering ethics, vol. 15, issue 3, September 2009 pp. 311-341.
[3] A. Cuthbertson (2015, December 14), International Business Times [Online]. Available: http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/brain-implants-robotic-hearts-transhumanist-zoltan-istvans-technology-predictions-2025-1533209

