... title: !!!! Experimental Semiotics via the Embodied Communication Game (ECG): Processes of Grammatical Evolution and Convergence in a Population of Humans.



Abstract

!!!! Experimental Semiotics via the Embodied Communication Game (ECG): Processes of Grammatical Evolution and Convergence in a Population of Humans.

Recently, it has been shown that humans, when engaging in dialogical communication in media that do not allow using oral or written language, are able to come up with new signal and communication systems [1]. It has also been shown that through interaction in communication games grammar may evolve [2]. There has been also work on the complexity of communication systems – at what point can be stated that a “grammar” is comprised? – and their functional use for cognition, claiming that grammatical communication systems only evolve in detached contexts [3]. It is now time to combine these strands of research. 
It will be presented an adapted version of the ECG (embodied communication game) [1] in which it shall be referred to different kind of stimuli in detached mode: varying from simple ones – reference to “colours” – to more complex ones – reference to “colours and shapes” or even “interactions of coloured shapes”. The stimuli are presented corresponding to the classification of communication systems in [3]. It will be investigated if three groups of human players (six literature students per group) – starting out in the ECG from different complexity levels – take the same road to the most complex level (“interacting coloured shapes”) when building up individual communication systems. In addition, it will be figured out if and how the populations “grammars” converge, when speakers of a group interact with new communication partners. It is also accounted for grammar “acquisition” by exposing a new player to the converged communication system of a group. The computer-based ECG will be refined by using additionally eye-tracking. This will allow for a more reliable interpretation of attention to the communication partner’s signalling and the player’s own goals. The analysis is carried out with the video transcription software ELAN. 

!! Acknowledgments 
Thanks a lot to Martin Takáč and Igor Farkaš who inspired me with their brilliant lectures!

!! References
[1] T. Scott-Phillips et al., “Signalling Signalhood and the emergence of communication,” Cognition, vol. 113, no. 2, pp. 226-233, Nov. 2009, doi:10.1016/j.cognition.2009.08.009.
[2] L. Steels, Ed., “Experiments in cultural language evolution” (Advances in interaction studies (AIS), no. 3), Amsterdam: Benjamins, 2012.
[3] P. Gärdenfors, “Cued and detached representations in animal cognition,” Behavioural Processes, vol. 35, no. 1-3, 263–273, Dec. 1995, doi:10.1016/0376-6357(95)00043-7.

