... title: Terrasim C++ GUI Client



Abstract

In this paper I am describing my motivation to create client application with graphical user interface to simulated virtual environment TerraSim which was created by Mgr. Ladislav Benc as his diploma thesis in 2011. 

“Our goal was to design an environment the agent can explore, reason about, categorize various objects it encounters and observe results of its actions. The simulation itself is implemented as a module for TerraSim – our solution working as a network server, allowing remote control of agents. Single- as well as multi-agent scenarios are supported. The modular architecture of TerraSim enables us to easily define multiple different scenarios with new sets of sensors, actuators or even whole worlds, making its potential uses quite broad. We also provide usage examples, an application for controlling the agent in any kind of simulation and a visualization application.”(Benc, 2011) 

As a programming language for building TerraSim was choosen C#. Benc also makes available graphical user interface client application written in C#. Choosen programing language is platform dependent. As I am using TerraSim in work on my thesis and I consider platform dependency as a significant restriction I have decided to overcome this problem by creating platform independent graphical user interface client application.For securing of platform independency I decided to write core of my application in C++ programming language and user interface using Qt framework. Product of this combination can be compiled on platform of one's choice and used to remotely control agents in virtual environment provided by instance of TerraSim installed on Windows OS platform. 

Client implements application user interface for easy integration of new types of agents(for example direct user controled agent, AI agents, …). Furthermore client contains log viewer with adjustable filter and visualization of virtual environment in which agents reside. 

In my thesis I focus on modeling of behavior of cognitive agents. TerraSim is simulating “human like” perception(agent can visualy percept only space and objects in direction which it is facing, it doesn't have access to atributes of objects which it can not detect by its sensors, etc )

My goal is to create population of agents, which will create representation of objects and actions they percieve in TerraSim, categorize them, reason about them, learn from their own actions as from action they percieved and hopefully they will develop language and signs of social interaction.

[1] Benc L., “Simulované prostredie pre učiacich sa agentov”[Simulated environment for learning agents], 2011.

