... title: Evaluation of the Allen Brain Atlas with respect to current questions in Molecular and Cognitive Neuroscience



Abstract

Unveiling the complex organization of the brain is the challenge of the 21st century. Different imaging and molecular investigation techniques as well as Big Data analyzation tools have contributed strongly towards this goal. The Allen Brain Atlas, an online open access Big Data tool developed by the Allen Institute of Brain Sciences, integrates the above mentioned techniques and provides a new powerful research device [1]. The following project aims to assess the value and limitations of this tool with respect to current questions in cognitive and molecular neuroscience, using as an example the GABAergic system and its role in memory functions and psychiatric diseases. The project is divided into three subprojects each dealing with a different atlas (i) Using the Allen Developing Mouse Brain Atlas, we examine the developmental expression of mRNA coding for the α5 subunit of the GABA-A receptor in the hippocampal formation and compare the findings to currently existing literature. Our focus is as much on the findings themselves as on the methods used to acquire the data. (ii) The Schizophrenia Study in the Allen Human Brain Atlas will serve as basis to confirm the involvement of genes related to the GABAergic system, like GAD67 in the PFC of patients with schizophrenia [2], and will be compared to data of the normal adult human brain. (iii) Evidence also suggests a role of the cerebellum in schizophrenia patients and expression of certain GABA-A receptor subunits seems to be altered at mRNA and protein levels in the cerebellum. Assessing the Allen Mouse Connectivity Atlas, we therefore examine the connections between the cerebellum and the PFC revealing its central role in cognitive functions other than motor functions. The Allen Connectivity Atlas might help to highlight the finding that a large fraction of cerebellar output maps to associative brain regions [3].
The assessment criteria, e.g.  applied to evaluate the different atlases will be selected corresponding to the specifications of each research question, e.g. if the data resolution is apt to asses molecular processes. The expected outcome is a detailed evaluation of the functionality, the advantages as well as the limits of the Allen Brain Atlas.
!!References
[1] SM Sunkin, L Ng, C Lau, T Dolbeare, TL Gilbert, CL Thompson, M Hawrylycz, and C Dang, “Allen Brain Atlas: An integrated spatio-temporal portal for exploring the central nervous system,” Nucleic Acids Res vol. 41, Nov. 2012.
[2] GD Hoftman, DW Volk, HH Bazmi, S Li, AR Sampson, and DA Lewis, “Altered cortical expression of GABA-related genes in schizophrenia: Illness progression vs developmental disturbance,” Schizophr Bull vol.41, pp.180–191, Dec. 2013 .
[3] Randy L Bruckner, ”The Cerebellum and Cognitive Functions,” Neuron vol. 80, pp. 807-815, Oct. 2013.

