... title: Vibrotactile Feedback Application to Increase Control in Virtual Reality Hand Prostheses



Abstract

- Introduction -
Few to no current commercially available prostheses provide intended sensory feedback, constraining the users to solely rely on visual feedback when controlling grasp force. However this is not the only hardship prostheses' wielders may face. Due to the lack of sensation the missing limb might not be felt as part of one's own body and is henceforth disintegrated from bodily awareness. The prosthetic device might even be doomed to negligence due to missing efficacy, intuitiveness or comfort [1]. 
The properties of the human haptic system provides a bidirectional communication between humans and interactive systems. “Haptic interaction offers an independent sensory channel that the brain can process to further enhance a user’s experience in a multimodal environment” [2]. Vibration is a common modality to induce haptic feedback, being adaptable in size, using relatively little power and easy to implement using mobile phone motors or piezoelectric actuators. Providing vibrotactile feedback might speed up reaction time and reduce hand-eye coordination or grasp force errors. To evaluate a set of factors specified below, test persons will be invited to participate in virtual reality experiments featuring visual and vibrotactile feedback application.

- Goals -
Virtual reality set ups conventionally use only a visual display in order for the user to interact.  Even though temporal resolution in the human eye has a successiveness threshold of 25 msec, which is five times the value of skin mechanoreceptors (5 msec) [3]. Regarding those physiological features, control and performance within a virtual reality can be improved through the application of haptic feedback. Especially in spatial awareness and object interaction, combining vision and haptics, seems to be advantageous and enhances the feeling of interacting within a real world, where there is a multitude of sensory feedback combinations [2]. Correspondingly increasing actual immersion of the user into the virtual environment. Which in return allows acting and reacting in a natural way in addition to reducing the cognitive work load while performing. Without the latter, the user might not feel sufficiently immersed in the virtual reality to behave intuitively. The overall goal is the amelioration of prosthetic control for determining grasp force when visual feedback alone is insufficient.

- Methods -
In order to use the capabilities of vibrotactile stimulation efficiently, there is a set of preliminaries which need to be explored within the psychological, physiological and technical cluster. To develop a haptic feedback system it is necessary to register the sensory attributes of the human body. In detail, this means to identify the correlation between subjective experience of the user and quantitative measurable stimuli (psychophysics) under the premise of given physiological characteristics. For instance there are several mechanoreceptors in the skin which respond to different types of tactile feedback, for vibration this receptor is called Pacini corpuscle.
As for the feedback application method of using vibration stimuli, the primitives to be identified are amplitude and frequency in order to derive their optimal feedback combination and gain an intermodally comparable transfer function. Moreover, the tested range of stimulus application needs to feel comfortable for the user in such a way that in the end the sensory feedback  is fully intuitive and accepted. For this, also location, material and size of the feedback system needs to be considered.
After the required characteristics of vibrotactile stimulation as well as psychophysical limitations have been identified and combined into a unique method of feedback application, the experimental phase to test its efficiency, accuracy, intuitiveness and comfort within a bidirectional human-computer interface within a virtual environment will commence. 
The experimental set up consists of a virtual reality lab in which participant's movements will be tracked via infrared cameras and reflecting markers on the person's body. Together with EMG signals which are derived from muscle contractions registered by surface electrodes placed on the person's arm, this information builds the basis for the movements of respective virtual elements (arm and hand) through which the user will be able to interact with other virtual objects. This manipulation will be perceived visually trough video goggles as well as haptically through a vibrating motor attached to the test person's arm. 
The actual test phase will be a sort of game, where the participant is asked to grab a virtual ball using the virtual hand and put it on a given place within the virtual environment. During this sequence, the person will receive haptic feedback on grasp force of the virtual ball. The performance in these tasks will be evaluated according to speed, accuracy, comfort, intuitiveness and efficiency. 
After the virtual test phase is finished, the participant will be given a short questionnaire to assess his/her personal opinion about the performance, which is important for the evaluating the non-measurable factors. 

- Results -
Since the experiments have to this day not started yet, the results can only be assumed. The hypothesis is the increasing interaction efficiency and accuracy, as well as raising levels in comfort and intuitiveness through the usage of haptic feedback.
As an overall final result, vibrotactile feedback can improve general prosthesis' handling and user performance through intuitive learning curves and adaptable handling. These concerns support the approaching advanced prostheses which efficiently and sensitively model the functionality of a human hand. 

- Discussion -
There are quite a few open grounds for discussions. One of them being the human factor. Not regarding personal preferences and obvious physiological limitations, which should still accomplish quite a representative population mean, there might be distinct disparities considering if the subject is top-down or bottom-up. Depending on the test person's attention, given when there is a task to focus on, the sensitivity to discriminate stimuli would be increased and sensory impressions would be more distinct and recognized faster. This would be different in a bottom-up style, where the test subject would only be presented with the vibration stimulus without a task to influence cognition. In this way the sensory threshold would differ according to the setting. 
Another topic would be about physiological effects. For reaching and grasping not only tactile mechanoreceptors are activated but also proprioceptive ones. The kinesthetic sensory system provides information about a limb's or joint's location and movement, and if the nature of this movement is self-generated or passively inflicted. Awareness of body movements and location might be difficult to achieve using a tactile feedback mechanism. 

- References -

[1] Christian Antfolk et al., A Tactile Display System for Hand Prostheses to Discriminate Pressure and Individual Finger Localization, Journal of Medical and Biological Engineering, 30/6, 355-360, 2010.

[2] Kelly S. Hale and Kay M. Stanney, Deriving Haptic Design Guidelines from Human Physiological, Pychological and Neurological Foundations. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 24/2 , 33-39, 2004.

[3] Grigore Burdea and Philippe Coiffet, Handbook of Virtual Environments, 92-115, 2003.

