... title: GDNF, Ibogaine and Addiction



Abstract

Chronic drug and alcohol abuse result in biochemical and structural changes
in the human brain and are especially expressed in midbrain dopaminergic
neurons. Studies suggest that activation of glial cell line-derived
neurotrophic factor (GDNF) signal pathways importantly promote growth,
survival and regeneration of dopaminergic and motor neuron populations in
adult brain. This properties make GDNF a potential candidate as a
therapeutic medicine for drug or alcohol addicts [1]. The problem appears
with administration, since GDNF cannot pass the blood brain barrier in the
human brain. Indole alkaloid, ibogaine, which is extracted from the roots of
the plant Tabernanthe iboga, promotes expression of GDNF in the brain.
Ingestion of ibogaine resets the balance of some receptors and transmitters.
Another studies showed ibogaine's effect on a cellular level that trigger
remodeling of the housekeeping metabolism. After some initial energy costs
it increases efficiency of physiological antioxidative systems, which reduce
oxidative damage and decrease basal metabolic needs, liberating free energy
for a prolonged period of time [2]. Patients can also gain from the
psychedelic experience, which are common for higher (~15mg/kg) doses. 
Intense introspective states can be a powerful therapeutic tool and tend to lead to some life promises. When ibogaine is administered to treat drug dependence,
patients usually report reduction of withdrawal syndromes and elimination of
drug craving for prolonged time periods. Because of the prohibitive
legislation of ibogaine in many countries, treatments are being held in
uncontrolled environments [3], what can cause problems for patients and
further research. Proper approach demands systematic testing before human
use, that is why studies on enzymes, yeast, rats and human hepatocytes are
necessary to create a safe medicine. For further work we have decided to
culture primary human hepatocyte line ex vivo, since it is a valuable model
for testing their mutual effects with drugs because to some degree the
metabolic and transport pathways stay the same as in the liver in vivo.

References 

[1] D. Ron and P. H. Janak. ''GDNF and addiction.'' Reviews in the
Neurosciences, vol. 16(4), pp. 277-285, 2005.

[2] R. Paškulin, P. Jamnik, T. Danevčič, G. Koželj, R. Krašovec, 
D. Krstić-Milošević and B. Štrukelj. "Metabolic plasticity and the 
energy economizing effect of ibogaine, the principal alkaloid of tabernanthe iboga." Journal of Ethnopharmacology, vol. 143(1), pp. 319-324, 2012.

[3] K. R. Alper, H. S. Lotsof and C. D. Kaplan. "The ibogaine medical
subculture." Journal of Ethnopharmacology, vol. 115(1), pp. 9-24, 2008.

