... title: Critical thinking as a connecting parameter between teaching mathematics and world perception



Abstract

!!!! Critical thinking as a connecting parameter between teaching mathematics and world perception
Critical thinking could be considered an investigating tool for the information age we live in. Without it, it is hard if not impossible to make sense of all the data entering our lives daily. As educational system should prepare us for our future, the author believes that critical thinking should be one of the main educational goals. 
One of the ways of teaching young students to think critically is teaching mathematics towards the development of divergent thinking. “Divergent thinking is a thought process or method used to generate creative ideas by exploring many possible solutions.”[1] Mathematics, however, is not considered to be an attractive studying option and the author proposes a question: What if the negative relationship to mathematics comes from lack of understanding of why mathematics should be studied? Students often do not see any connection between this subject and the world they live in, therefore they find it useless. If mathematics were taught in a way that could help students solve real-life situations, develop critical thinking and emotional intelligence, would students’ general opinion change?
The goal of this research is to examine students’ relationship to mathematics and if it could be changed positively if mathematics were taught in a way to prepare students for the future. Data comes from 2 main groups of Grammar school students (age 15-18): one of the groups studies at an institution focused on humanity studies, the second group of students comes from a mathematical background.  Data is collected in a form of short questionnaire that is handed to each student at the beginning of the whole experiment and at the end of it. Between filling in the required information students are given 2 math lessons. The first lesson is dedicated to Problem solving - “A problem in mathematics is defined as a situation in which the solver perceives the situation as a problem and accepts the challenge of solving it but does not have a previously known strategy to do so, or is unable to recall such a strategy.” [2] The author believes that such activities can lead to development of both: critical thinking and emotional intelligence, if there is a small reflection included after each brain exercise. Consecutive lesson draws students into Real-world mathematical project which is meant to make students more involved in the world they live in and to think about the connections among distinct world components [3]. The results show not only differences between students’ attitudes from the beginning and the end of the research, but they are also a useful comparison between 2 types of educational systems.  

!! References
[1] Runco, Mark A. Divergent thinking. Ablex Publishing, 1991. 
[2] CEPS journal. (2013). Center for Educational Policy Studies Journal, volume 3, No.4, 2013.
[3] Gutstein, E. (2006). Reading and writing the world with mathematics: Toward a pedagogy for social justice. New York: Routledge, 2006.

