... title: Effects of Distraction on Creativity



Abstract

!!!!Effects of Distraction on Creativity

!!Distraction as Part of the Creative Process
There are anecdotes of creative writers who do different things during their writing process. One example is Trey Parker, the co-creator of the TV series South Park. He plays Lego, because he believes that it helps him to activate other parts of his brain. A closely related concept from creativity research is incubation, which is defined as "setting the problem aside for a time, after a period of preliminary work" [1]. Its beneficial role in the creative process has often been reported and is widely accepted in the scientific community [1,2]. 

Studies based on the incubation paradigm assume that we have to set the problem aside in order to take advantage of a distraction task. In this study, however, the goal is to examine the effects of distraction not only during incubation, but also during the creative process. If performing different routine tasks during creative work has similar effects on our creative performance as incubation, it might change our models of creativity and it might allow us to improve our creative processes.

!!Study Design
Divergent Thinking (DT) is the ability to generate many creative ideas about a topic and it is considered to be an indicator for creative potential [3]. In this study, the subjects have to perform a DT task which consists of finding as many ways as possible how certain objects can be used. e.g.: a brick (as weights for weightlifting, as sponge, etc.). As distraction task, the subjects have to solve very simple children puzzles.

There are three conditions: A control condition, an incubation condition and a multitasking condition. In the control condition, the subjects only carry out the DT task. In the incubation condition, the subjects have to perform the DT task, switch to the distraction task in the incubation phase and then they return to the previous DT task. In the multitasking condition, the subjects have to perform the DT task and the distraction task simultaneously. Creativity is measured through originality (relative frequency of a response) and fluency (total amount of responses of a subject).

!!Expected Results
Since the multitasking condition represents the strongest cognitive challenge, we have to expect that the subjects show the worst performance in this condition. If the subjects benefit from the distraction task, however, we might need to interpret previous studies on incubation differently. Further studies on the underlying mechanism would be required.

!! References
[1]	K. J. Gilhooly, G. Georgiou, and U. Devery, „Incubation and creativity: Do something different“, Think. Reason., pp. 1–13, Dec. 2012.
[2]	U. N. Sio and T. C. Ormerod, „Does incubation enhance problem solving? A meta-analytic review.“, Psychol. Bull., vol. 135, no. 1, pp. 94, 2009.
[3]	M. A. Runco and S. Acar, „Divergent Thinking as an Indicator of Creative Potential“, Creat. Res. J., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 66–75, Jan. 2012.

