... title: Is There Any Difference Between Feeling and Acting an Emotion?



Abstract

!!!!Is There Any Difference Between Feeling And Acting an Emotion?

Taking into consideration my experience in acting and my philosophical background I would like to find out what kind of experiment settings are designed in order to observe corresponding movements to the several emotional states; such as fear, sadness, happiness and anger. Since most of these experiments are done with the use of actors, I would also like to analyze whether it makes any difference to use actors in emotion expression studies, and why? Within this framework, it is necessary to go deeper in the theories of emotion processes and analyze further the question of how emotion relates to expression.  

The first question to be addressed is what emotions are and how the process is. In order to answer this, one needs to review different approaches and relate those with the discussions using actors in experiments. With this purpose, cognitive, somatic feedback and embodied approaches to emotion definition will be examined in detail. Besides, the Schachter and Singer Theory [1] which states that the emotions are not only physiological reactions but also are cognitive activities of labeling, is going to be discussed in order to approximate the cognitive and somatic feedback theories. The reason why the different theories of emotion process needs to be examined, is to be able to discuss whether there could be difference between imagining and experiencing an emotion. 

My main aim is to show that, getting into an emotional state while acting, does not involve the same process as natural emotion expression; which could be a barrier in emotion expression studies. My assumption is that there is a methodological problem in using actors: the results won’t give adequate data about expressions in a natural way, since acting requires imagining and arousing the body in order to form an emotional state. So there is an artificial stimuli created by themselves, where the distinction between artificial and natural expression occurs. I will base my assumption on the idea that emotion has no imaginative counterpart which is argued by Currie and Ravenscoft [2]. 


!!References
[1]​Schachter S., Singer J., "Cognitive, Social, and Physiological Determinants of Emotional State" Psychological Review, Vol. 69, pp. 379-399, 1962 
[2]​Currie, G., & Ravenscroft, I., "Recreative Minds: Imagination in Philosophy and Psychology", Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2002

