... title: Measuring Empathy in Relation to the Attitudes Towards Refugees



Abstract

The refugee crisis that hit Europe is a significant social phenomenon. This work is an attempt to react on the discussion elicited by this crisis. The negative attitudes of the majority of Slovak population towards the refugees were an appropriate object on closer research from the viewpoint of the connection of these attitudes to the empathy of people, since the empathy is perceived as a key factor of the approach towards the other people; also in the public discussion, the empathy was often being connected with the attitudes towards the refugees. These facts were a good enough reason for conducting a research with the research question whether there is a statistically significant correlation between the empathy and the attitudes towards the refugees. The work offers The Empathy Quotient Questionnaire from Simon Baron-Cohen localised for Slovak language by backward-translating the English original which is one the work’s contributions. [1] The next one is a newly created questionnaire of the attitudes towards the refugees. Both questionnaires use Likert's scale. [2]

After the theoretical specification of the problem, the results of the research are presented in the research part of the work. 163 respondents living in Slovakia took part of the research. The results give three following conclusions. First, there was not found any statistically significant correlation between the empathy and the attitudes towards the refugees – neither in case of men, nor in the case of women. Second, the higher empathy of women as of men was confirmed and this difference was statistically significant. Third, the attitudes towards the refugees were not found to be significantly different by sex of the participants. However, the structure of these attitudes was different among the sexes. This work is a contribution to the public discussion on the problem of refugees and offers the options for the next research.

!!References
[1] S. Baron-Cohen. Věda zla. Brno: Emitos, 2014.
[2] J. Schenk and A. Hrabovská. Škálovanie: základné jednodimenzionálne metódy. Bratislava: Univerzita Komenského v Bratislave, 2010.

