... title: The Role of the Moving/Dancing Body in Treating Mental Illnesses



Abstract

The Role of the Moving/Dancing Body in Treating Mental Illnesses

In the context of a circular or ecological psychiatry as described by Thomas Fuchs, there is a need to extend the concept of mental illness to one that encompasses not only the brain but also the body and the environment [1]. This goes hand in hand with the concept of mental illness in phenomenological psychopathology as primarily being a disturbance of the lived body. The aim of the project is to analyze how two different therapy methods, namely Somatic Experiencing (SE) and dance/movement therapy (DMT), both endorsing an embodied and enactive approach to mental illness, make use of bodily movements to resolve symptoms related to Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) and Depression.
Although insights into the therapeutic benefits of the moving/dancing body are growing and promising, much of the literature is not sufficiently concrete about how bodily movements are involved in the healing of mental illnesses, neither from a neurobiological nor a phenomenological perspective. Moreover, as there is a huge diversity in embodied therapies, differing in their theoretical and practical frameworks, important insights into the role of bodily movements are left unconnected.
In SE, which is grounded in an evolutionary biological perspective, Peter Levine argues that PTSD develops when the body is restrained from completing its movements in a traumatic situation and thus to release trauma, one must allow these blocked movements to come to completion [2]. Levine’s work is rarely mentioned either in phenomenological psychopathology or in the context of embodied therapies, let alone connected to outcomes provided by DMT-studies on PTSD and Depression. In order to strengthen and deepen the importance of the body and its movements in restoring mental health, this research project aims at connecting and bridging the different insights gained in SE and DMT. This will mainly be done through a theoretical analysis of the commonalities and differences in SE and DMT, such as in their theoretical and practical frameworks and the patient-therapist relationship. Given the success of SE and the increasing insights on the effectiveness of DMT in patients diagnosed with PTSD or Depression, it is argued that the moving/dancing body should become an essential part of therapy, though it will also be questioned to what extent it can replace traditional talk-therapy and pharmaceutical interventions.

!!References
[1] T. Fuchs, “Embodied cognitive neuroscience and its consequences for psychiatry,” Poiesis Prax., vol. 6, pp. 219-233, 2011. 
[2] P. A. Levine, In An Unspoken Voice. How the Body Releases Trauma and Restores Goodness. Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books, 2010.

