... title: !!Provoked Confabulation in Patients with Brain Diseases



Abstract

!!Introduction: The aim of this study is to investigate how spread the phenomenon of confabulation is among patients with brain diseases. The term confabulation broadly refers to false or incongruous statements which are produced without the conscious knowledge of their falsehood and without the intention to deceive. To date, limited consensus has been reached regarding the definition, classification, differential diagnosis and cognitive mechanisms underlying this disorder. One accepted view among authors is that confabulations differ in the way they manifest. They can be categorized into two major sub-types in terms of form: spontaneous or provoked. Spontaneous confabulations occur without prompting and appear as an incoherent stream of consciousness whereas provoked confabulations occur in response to direct questioning and appear as a normal response to a faulty memory. There are many experimental studies describing single cases and others made with larger groups of patients who are already expected to be confabulatory. However, there is a lack of experiments involving larger samples with various neurological patients who are not a priori defined as confabulatory. With the use of a standardized, structured questionnaire, the present study will test the hypothesis whether provoked confabulations are more wide-spread among patients with brain disease. 
!!Methods: The instrument chosen to elicit confabulations is Dalla Barba’s Confabulation Battery [1], which has been used in numerous studies to quantify the number of confabulations across episodic, semantic, personal and non-personal domains. The questionnaire was translated and localized into Slovene. The subjects in the experimental group were recruited at the Neurological Clinic of Ljubljana. The inclusion criteria for the experimental group, which we believe will consist of 50 or more subjects, will be very broad in order to include as many different types of neurological patients as possible. The interview will be held at the hospital room of the participant. Every conversation will be recorded with consensus of the participant and re-listened by another experimentator before analyzing the data. The control group will consist of 20 or more healthy subjects who will match the experimental group on age and gender.
!!Preliminary results and future research: The results of the questionnaire will be compared between the experimental and control group. In case some significant differences emerge, we will investigate the neurodegenerative disorder or location of brain lesion of those subjects who resulted confabulatory on test scores. We also consider analyzing the quantity, type and content of confabulations of confabulatory subjects and try identifying whether there is a common pattern occurring within groups of neurological patients. The criteria for dividing patients by neuropathologies still have to be determined. We believe that our research is not only important for determining how wide-spread the phenomenon of confabulation is, but also to test whether questionnaires as the one used in our study are appropriate for distinguishing confabulatory subjects from healthy individuals or patients with other disorders (e.g. Aphasia),  which might be wrongly classified as confabulatory. 
!!References:

[1] Barba, G. D. “ Confabulation: Knowledge and recollective experience ”. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 10(1), 1-20, 1993.

