... title: Delicate Thoughts. A Phenomenology Of Food Cravings.



Abstract

!!!! Delicate Thoughts. A Phenomenology Of Food Cravings.

Food Matters. You will agree that “food is for nourishing, for fuelling the body, for building bones, teeth and muscle” [1], but there is more to it than nutrition. Current research connects concepts such as »food cravings« to issues of obesity, depression, addiction or compulsion [2]. This seems intuitive and as our daily experience with research shows we often work with phenomena and concepts that appear quite clear to us, up to the point where we ask ourselves on how to actually define and operationalize them. Looking at possible assessments of food cravings via arbitrary rating scales, speed of consumption, physiological arousal or saliva secretion should evoke curiosity on how many other concepts in current research work with hypothetical constructs that are hardly directly measurable.

Food cravings provide as a typical example for the manifold of poorly understood phenomena where obtaining reliable data seems to disregard experiential data for the sake of focusing on science-based measurements. This Master thesis will therefore aim at a point of discourse that I claim to be of core relevance for the discussion of Cognitive Science as a discipline, namely the discordance between science-based and experiential forms of knowledge.

Instead of looking through a micronutrient lens of explaining mechanisms, an experiential approach towards understanding food experiences may give rise to novel perspectives towards psychological and social aspects of nurturance.

The thesis consists of three connected main aspects:
1) Experiential data will be obtained using qualitative methods of dialogical phenomenology within in-depth interviews and analyzed according to open coding in grounded theory, aiming at a case-based mapping of food-related thoughts.
2) Potential patterns and commonalities found in the data will then be integrated into the design of a methodological strategy for experiential data input, by identifying relevant categories and modalities of experiences that may allow a more structured protocol for assessing food-related experiences. 
3) This strategy will be applied and evaluated to assist in the third dimension, namely the mapping for a topology of food-related thoughts & experiences.

The chosen topic of interest is both integrating the personal interest and the increasing trend of investigating food-related phenomena, identified by current interdisciplinary research on the generation and perception of flavour as well as their influence on behavior and nutrition. 

Delimited from prior hypotheses, experiences will be discussed following the approach of problematization according to Freire, as a "process of posing questions in order to deconstruct a particular phenomenon so as to understand its construct"[3] that shall call attention to the crucial role of first person reports and our way of assessing research data mostly in demarcation to a participant’s experience.

!! References
[1] D. Lupton. Food, the Body and the Self. London, UK: SAGE Publications Limited, 1996, p7.
[2] M. L. Pelchat. “Of human bondage: food craving, obsession, compulsion, and addiction”. Physiology & Behavior, 2002, 76(3), p347-352.
[3] A. C. L. A. Jurema, M. D. L. Correia Pimentel, T. D. S. C.Cordeiro & A. G. Austregésilo Nepomuceno. “Disclosing the making of phenomenological research: Setting free the meanings of discourse.” Forum: Qualitative Social Research, 2006, September, Vol. 7, No. 4.

