... title: Family Holiday: Addressing collective coherence towards better understanding of emotional group-decision making



Abstract

Group-decision making is a vital part of our life. I intent to investigate the modelling approach of social group decision-making scenarios that aim towards reaching group consensus based on cognitive and emotional factors within the theory of coherence. More specific, my objectives are to clarify the components of the underlying architecture to point out methodological advantages and drawbacks of the approach. I shall present identified key issues and their tackling attempts for the desire of improvement of the concept by making use of ideas from specific group decision making literature.

The initial and predominant idea of decision making addresses the maximization of the long run average value or expected value EV given by EV=sum(pj*xj) where p stands for the probability and x for the objective outcome for some number of outcomes n. The theory regarding the behavior of decision-making understands humans as explicit rational beings. The nature of the decision-maker is to consciously anticipate consequences, to evaluate risks and values and eventually decide after a careful analysis of the expected utility. Models that have this notion of rationality incorporated are usually fundamentally idealized and lack empirical evidence. There is the need of incorporating results from recent research that point out the fundamental emotional nature and vital social dimension of human decision making processes. There is also increasing effort in taking into account the bigger picture of human thinking and reasoning.

This work starts off building on Paul Thagard`s basic idea and concept of coherence in thought and action (Thagard 2000). Thagard proposes a general theory of coherence as the satisfaction of multiple interacting constraints and shows that this theory has numerous psychological and philosophical applications since much of human cognition could be understood in terms of coherent constraint satisfaction. It has been well studied in the field of cognitive science and as a general theory to describe the world. Within Thagard discusses how people make sense of each other and the world they live in on the basis of fitting something puzzling into a coherent pattern of mental representations, including concepts, beliefs, goals and actions.
Coherence theory is basically concerned about how different pieces can fit together to make a whole. It assumes that there are a range of kinds of associations between the pieces or the elements of a set. These are primarily positive or negative where a positive association suggests that the two elements support each other while a negative association indicates their mutual exclusion (Thagard 2000). Thagard views these associations as constraints between elements. He proposes a theory of coherence as the global aim to maximize the satisfaction of these constraints. Further he proposes to divide the set of elements into accepted and rejected ones in a way that overall coherence is achieved, or constraint satisfaction maximized.
The intuition behind the idea of coherence as maximizing constraint satisfaction as defined by Thagard (Thagard 2000) is that there are various degrees of coherence or incoherence relations between established nodes. In the case of a strong negative association between two nodes, coherence can be increased by deciding to accept one node but reject the other. In the same way if there is a strong positive association, then coherence will be increased when either both nodes are accepted or both nodes are rejected. Accordingly it is possible to construct a partition of the set of nodes, with one set of nodes in the partition being accepted and the other rejected in such a way to maximize the coherence of the entire set. In this sense, accepted sets are denoted by A, rejected sets by R. The numerical value of coherence can be calculated by considering positive associations within nodes of A and within nodes of R and negative associations between nodes of A and R. This is the so-called criteria of constraints satisfaction.
Based on these principles Thagard & Kroon (2005) undertake the enterprise simulating group decision making behavior using a computational artificial neuronal network model (HOTCO3) that implements the above mentioned coherence concept. Further it acknowledges the fact that human decision making is inherently emotional by implementing mechanisms that allow emotional inference with the help of the concept of emotional coherence (Thagard 2000). Thagard seems to be able to show that group-decision behavior towards reaching consensus is indeed based on coherence and demonstrates it in a mathematically exact, computationally sufficient and psychologically plausible way.

In my opinion, however, three main challenges to this concept and its implementation arise: a.) randomly selection of agents for exchanging factual and emotional information; b.) serial communication process, just two agents interaction within one time step; c.) focus given only on the two agents interchanging information, neglecting the rest of the group situation.

The concentration on the nature of emotional coherence in collective decisions and the connection between the emotional and cognitive moments in the theory of collective coherence could open new perspectives. I propose that the adaption of the HOTCO3 implementation in a way that there is an instance that influences the whole group decision scenario when a situation is encountered. That would mean that there is an influence from the current two interacting agents on the whole group of agents and vice versa. This idea is inspired from Andrej Ule's notion energizing factors within his proposed theory of collective decision making as the actualization of decision potential (Ule 2009).

REFERENCE
Thagard, P., 2000. Coherence in Thought and Action, MIT Press.

Thagard, P. & Kroon, F.W., 2005. Emotional consensus in group decision making. Mind & Society, 5(1), 85-104.

Ule, A. 2009. Collective Decision Making as the Actualization of Decision Potential. Interdisciplinary Description of Complex Systems 7(2), 90-105, 2009.

