... title: Meditation and the Brain. The Impact of Long-Term Meditation on Attentional Engagement.



Abstract

INTRODUCTION
Meditation can be seen as a mental training, which supports the cultivation of a certain internal state in one´s own mind over a long period of time. This emotional and regulatory training has been developed for various ends, but gaining a state of well-being and emotional balance are two major aims, which should be reached through almost every meditative practice. A full range of meditation types exists, whereas the distinction between two major styles has been proven to be useful for scientific investigations: One type is called focused attention meditation (FA), where all attention is focused on a specific object. The other one, open monitoring meditation (OM), involves a non-reactive monitoring of the actual experience from moment to moment. Although, proper evidence if brain activity is altered systematically due to meditation is still missing, recent studies suggest that long-term meditation has an influence on brain activity in form of altered neurophysiological processes [1]. In this respect Cahn and Polich [2] showed that during one form of OM-meditation, called Vipassana, decreased automated reactivity and evaluative processing of task irrelevant attention-demanding stimuli occurred in contrast to the control state. More precisely, their results showed that the P3a amplitude, which is a subcomponent of the P300 potential, was reduced when a distracter tone was presented during meditation and that the reduction of this amplitude was strongest in participants, who practiced more hours of daily meditation. These findings support the hypothesis that long-term meditation can alter neurophysiological processes and that this mental training can induce plastic changes in the brain.

AIM OF THE STUDY
The aim of this study is to investigate if these neurophysiological changes are also observable in more concentrative forms of meditation. One can expect that focused attention meditation leads to stronger alterations of event related potentials (ERP's) in form of a more decreased P3a amplitude during meditation when the distracter signal is presented. The reason for that is that this style of practice tries to remove the attentional systems even further away from the immediate surroundings, which should  lead to a stronger decrease of the P3a component when the distracter stimulus is presented. Therefore, this study wants to show that during both types of meditation the P3a amplitude will be decreased relative to the control condition when the distracter stimuli is presented. Furthermore, we expect that the two different types of meditation will elicit different P3a component amplitudes, while the distracter is presented and the group of matched controls will exhibit no amplitude changes, while imitating a meditative state. 

METHODS 
A so-called passive auditory 3-stimulus oddball task will be applied, which contains a frequent standard tone, an oddball tone and a distracter stimulus. The standard tone occurs to an extent of 70%, whereas the oddball and distracter tone appear 15% each time. All stimuli are presented passively and no task is imposed, which means that subjects will listen to the sounds without counting or any button press. These randomly presented stimuli evoke event related potentials [3]. The classical oddball paradigm, which contains only standard and target tones is often used to elicit a P300 signal and can be seen as a brain response to the presentation of an infrequent target stimulus. In this study a 3-stimulus oddball task will be applied, which entails an occurrence of a P3a component during distracter signal presentation and a P3b component during target stimulus presentation, respectively. It is hypothesised that the P3a component, which is of interest in this study, is an index for frontal neural activity produced by stimulus-driven attention mechanisms, whereas P3b is thought to be an index for temporal-parietal activity that reflects resource allocation that contributes subsequent memory processing. EEG data will be obtained by using a 128-channel ActiCAP and analysed in EEGLAB toolbox for Matlab. In addition to the measurements an extensive phenomenological questionnaire will be handed out to the participants to collect valuable first-person data during the different recording conditions.   

PROCEDURE
20 long-term meditators coming from different meditation schools, but acquainted with both meditation styles and 20 age-matched controls with no meditation experience will participate in this study. To guarantee that meditators are able to perform both types of meditation and exhibit meditation experience of several years, questionnaires will be filled out before they actually participate in the study. During the EEG-recordings they will be asked to sit relaxed and straight on a chair with their eyes half open and their mouth closed in a sound proof and electrically shielded room. While their gaze is focused on a fixation cross in the middle of a computer screen, auditory stimuli from the 3-stimulus oddball paradigm will be presented randomly over the speaker system. The entire procedure consists of 6 different conditions, whereby during every condition phases of silence are interspersed with phases where oddball stimuli are presented. During the first condition subjects have to listen actively to the presented stimuli. Condition two should be equivalent to a mind-wandering state, where controls and meditators are encouraged to think about themselves or neutral past events. These two conditions last for 10 minutes each and are followed by the two different kinds of meditation. In the first meditation condition, which lasts 20 minutes, meditators will try to facilitate a focused attention type of meditation, which is induced by the focus on breathing. This condition is followed by an open monitoring type of meditation of the same length, where practitioners try to facilitate a non-reactive monitoring from moment to moment. Controls imitate a meditation-like experience and they are instructed to either observe their breathing during condition 3 or to go through the sensations of their body and observe them in a non-reactive manner. The following last two conditions 5 and 6 are equal to condition 1 and 2 but are presented in reverse order. After every condition precise questions about the phenomenological experience will be asked to enable a profound linking between the actual experienced state of consciousness and neurophysiological data referring to Francisco Varela's proposed research programme of neurophenomenology. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Thanks to the Department of Neurophysiology at the University Medical Centre and the Mind & Brain Lab in Ljubljana, especially to Grega Repovš for his support and for the supervision of my thesis. I also want to thank my colleagues Ditka Jeran, Jure Bon, Borut Škodlar and Breda Podjaveršek and all subjects, who participated in this study.


[1] Lutz, A., Slagter, H. A., Dunne, J. D., & Davidson, R. J. (2008). Attention regulation and monitoring in meditation. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12(4), 163-169. 

[2] Cahn, B. R., & Polich, J. (2009). Meditation (Vipassana) and the P3a event-related brain potential. International Journal of Psychophysiology, 72(1), 51-60. 

[3] Polich, J. (2007). Updating P300: An integrative theory of P3a and P3b. Clinical Neurophysiology, 118, 2128-2148.

