... title: Henry Rider Haggard’s "She" and Cognitive Dissonance



Abstract

Background
Human beings are constantly trying to align their self-concepts with their beliefs. As a result, most people tend to conceive of themselves as "moral" people. If they do not manage to be sure of their morality while believing that it is important to be moral, they are likely to face cognitive dissonance (psychological conflict resulting from incongruous beliefs and attitudes held simultaneously). The worldview of late 19th century colonial Britain contained many morally questionable attitudes (mainly racism and misogyny), which were generally accepted and perpetuated.

Focus
For this project, I have chosen a par excellence case of cognitive dissonance – Henry Rider Haggard (1856-1925) was a man who spent seven of his formative years in Africa as an assistant of colonial officials. At the same time, he was a writer and a scholar whose writing reflected existentialist thought and utmost intellectual sincerity. His novel She [1] is commonly referred to as an adventure novel suffering from both genre limitations and discrimination. However, there is a high proportion of philosophising. The character of She has a complex, distinct worldview which would not seem to have any purpose if She was to be discarded as easy reading. I propose that She can be interpreted as a result of Haggard's internal struggle between the worldview of colonial Britain imposed on him (represented by the narrator) and his intuition (represented by She).

Method
The central paradigm of this project is cognitive philology, the study of textual material as the product of human cognitive processes. My research consists in analyzing the text through the optics of two theories: schema theory which holds that all knowledge is organized into units; and text world theory which claims that human beings understand discourse by constructing complete and coherent mental representations (text worlds). These are applied to the text in order to identify the manifestations of author's cognitive dissonance.

Results
The main results of this project can be summarized as follows: Haggard's intuitions, as reflected in the character of Ayesha, contained many attitudes which anticipated the socio-cultural changes of the 20th century, for example the emancipation of women, vegetarianism, secularity, moral relativism and economic thinking. Despite the fact that all this is set within a popular and Victorian-friendly plot, where these visionary attitudes not always consistently mix with typical genre-defining features (eternal love, cruelty, happy ending), the representatives of colonial Britain are unexpectedly vague in defending their worldview. All this is making up for an interesting mosaic, which can be looked upon as a "map" of Haggard's cognitive dissonance.

Conclusion
It is necessary to stress that despite being likeably wrapped as an adventure novel, She is a highly psycho-socio-culturally significant book which enables us to illustrate the impact of writing and reading literature on individual and group cognition. This project indicates that human striving for consistency is invariable throughout history, but at the same time the moral consensus is highly context-dependent, which could contribute to the discussion about the nature of morality and to a better understanding of historical processes through cognition.

[1] Haggard, Henry Rider. She. 1887. Project Gutenberg. Web. 19 May 2012.

