... title: People with near death experiences under mortality salient condition



Abstract

Terror Management Theory assumes that humans have developed defends mechanisms in order to protect them from existential anxiety they experience when they have to face their mortality. Existential anxiety arises due to surviving instinct and the awareness of the inevitability of death. As research has shown when individuals feel threatened by death they foster a state called symbolic immortality, attempting to connect themselves to a broader social entity--either some collective, pursuit, or meaning. Moreover individuals should become more inclined to adopt the norms, attitudes, and beliefs of this social entity in order to gain security. That proposal could be derived by “evolutionary forces” that make the indivual seek protection within a group if threatened by death. In order to receive this protection from a bigger group however, one needs to achieve a sense of self-esteem within that cultural worldview. Self-esteem lies at the heart of TMT, and is a fundamental part of its main experimental paradigms. Consequently, it has been shown that under mortality salience (MS) individuals perceive members of their collective as more favourable than members of other collectives after they reflect on their mortality. Moreover it has been shown in myriads of studies that people become less tolerant to other collectives. E.g.:  One study demonstrated that Christian subjects evaluated other Christians more positively in comparison to Jews only when they were in the mortality salient (MS) condition but not in the control condition. Another study demonstrated that judges in the MS condition set significantly harsher bonds (over $400) for prostitutes in comparison to judges in the control condition.

The present study aims to investigate people with near death experiences under mortality salient condition.  It is not clear what the results will look like yet, since there are too few participants up to now. It is expected that people with near death experiences have more intrinsic values and decreased cultural world view defence. 

The study is being carried out online via the platform survey monkey. The design consisted of two conditions; (a) pain (c) death and two different groups of participants (people that had near death experience and participants without near death experience). That means one group with people without near death experience mixed with participants that had a near death experience are being asked to write down one sentence related to pain (control group) wheras the other group has to think about a sentence regarding death. Afterwards there is a dummy test plus a questionair that they have to fill out in order to receive a personality discription. Participants receive a bogus personality description, which is very positive in nature and were asked to rate how much they agree with it or not. 

The primary aim of the study was to investigate whether near-death-experienced participants would produce less self-esteem striving than people without near-death-experience as reflected by participants' evaluation of their bogus personality descriptions.

