... title: Relationship Between Mathematical and Musical Abilities in Middle School Students



Abstract

This thesis explores the relationship between STEM (Science Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) and music from different aspects, including education, psychology, cognition and neuroscience. This relationship is based on transfer of learning, which represents a way of learning, when knowledge is obtained in one field and is available to utilize in some other field [1]. This phenomenon may be approached on neural and behavioural levels and is divided into different categories, based on its context [2]. The aim of theoretical part of this thesis is finding a common intersection of different scientific fields to reinforce interdisciplinarity. This study is carried out in collaboration with Slovak Academy of Sciences and OECD – CERI department, which is currently in the state of conductuding international testing of knowledge and creativity in order to explore the international differences between elementary school students. The experiment was in form of pre-/post-tests with intervention. Both series of tests consisted of 3 different types of tasks, derived from OECD PISA and TIMMS testing, exploring knowledge in STEM, VAM (Visual Arts and Music) from witch music knowledge was determined, and mathematical creativity. The data obtained from this testing on Slovak students narrowed the selection of subjects to two groups – eight grade students (n = 81) and third grade students (n = 162). The outcome serves to emphasize the possibility of achieving better motivation and understanding of natural sciences integrating music into educational process and bringing this opportunity to public educational system, which currently does not utilize the potential of this phenomenon [3]. The results have shown only weak significant correlation and regression analysis shown a significant trend between music and STEM scores (r = 0.227; R2 = 0.051), music scores and divergent mathematical creativity (r = 0.184; R2 = 0.034) on third-graders data and even negative non-linear significant correlations and trends in regression between STEM scores  and the amount of two types of music lesson activity - active music engagement (τ = -0.187; rs = -0.251; R2 = 0.073) and standard activity (τ = -0.265; rs = -0.355; R2 = 0.136). This finding demonstrates relationship between the two fields at least to some extent, yet the nature of it is quite disputable.
!!References
[1] A. Robins, "Transfer in cognition", connection science, vol. 8(2), pp. 185-204, 1996.
[2] D. H. Shunk, "Learning Theories: An Educational Perspective", Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling, vol. 53, 2013. 
[3] S. A. An, D. A. Tillman, "Music Activities as a Meaningful Context for Teaching Elementary Students Mathematics: A Quasi-Experiment Time Series Design with Random Assigned Control Group", European Journal of Science and Mathematics Education, vol. 3(1), 45-60, 2015.

