... title: Serotonin Transporter Quantification in the Living Human Brain Using Positron Emission Tomography and the Multilinear Reference Tissue Model (MRTM2) Implemented in Matlab



Abstract

Positron emission tomography (PET) is a nuclear brain imaging technique, enabling the investigation of cerebral uptake and distribution of molecules in vivo, i.e. proteins (enzymes, receptors and transporters) [1]. Different from other brain imaging systems, such as functional magnetic resonance tomography (fMRI) signaling relies on the injection of a radioactive marked tracer, a so-called radioligand. A radioligand is a radioactive labeled molecule consisting of a biochemical compound with an affinity to a certain target protein [1].
One quantitative measurement is the binding potential (BP) which is defined as the ratio of receptor density Bmax to radioligand equilibrium dissociation constant KD [2] and allows an inference to the protein density. The BP is determined for each radioligand by specific mathematical models according to its characteristic kinetics.
So far, the implementation of these models is limited to commercial software tools (e.g. PMOD) or realized in lab internal solutions. The purchase of such software packages is expensive, whereas it does not include an option for lab internal modification due to inaccessible algorithms and program scripts. Lab depending implementations on the other hand are time consuming and mostly redundant, as the same models underlies in the application of a specific radioligand. Open-source solutions are not widely established in the PET community yet, contrary to disposable fMRI research tools (e.g. preprocessing and analysis tools such as SPM, FSL or Freesurfer).
The aim of the present study will be to implement a Matlab-based tool in the concrete case of the radioligand [11C]DASB. The radioligand [11C]DASB binds reversibly to the serotonin transporter (SERT) [3] and plays a crucial role in the investigation of neuropsychiatric impairments, such as major depression and obsessive-compulsive disorder. The SERT binding potential (BPND) can be estimated with reference to the cerebellum, a brain area consistent of only few SERT binding sites [3], used as a so-called reference region for the investigation of the 5-HT transporter. The underlying model is called the multilinear reference tissue model with two parameters (MRTM2), which generates computationally fast and noise resistant parametric images of BPND.
One of the main advantages of this Matlab-based  MRTM2 implementation will be the opportunity to facilitate performance modifications in MRTM2 analysis, such as study-aligned parameter tuning and the determination of lab depending default values. This tool can represent an alternative to present commercial software packages through similar outcome parameters at a comparable computational speed, however available for all potential users as an open-source application. A graphical user interface (GUI) will enable data processing for a various group of users, such as neuroscientists, a batch script mode will simplify routine analysis sequences and will also allow the evaluation across subjects within a study, as so far only single subject analysis is realized in commercial software tools. Furthermore, the extension for additional models of other radioligands would be conceivable. 
PET data from the SERT database of both subjects suffering from major depression and healthy control subjects, will be provided by the Functional, Molecular & Translational Neuroimaging Lab, Vienna (http://www.meduniwien.ac.at/neuroimaging). These data will serve as basis for outcome comparisons of the commercial software PMOD and the Matlab-based implementation. Applying the model Ichise Noninvasive MRTM2 in PMOD to quantify the BPND and rate constants of key regions as the thalamus, striatum and the midbrain, similar results will be expected by using the Matlab-based tool.

