... title: Factors Influencing Our Food Perception



Abstract

The field of modern civilization diseases (obesity, cardiovascular diseases, neurodegeneration, atherosclerosis etc.) has become an important field of study in today's day and age. While different factors are associated with these diseases, in our work, the focus will be on the diet. Two aspects of dieting will be established and described. First it is hard not to put a causal link between our eating activity and the modern diseases, since exposure to modern food resources is positively and strongly correlated to the number of occurring conditions [1]. Therefore the access to modern, processed foods is one part of the equation. Another part of the equation however, is also our food perception. While most animals are driven by internal homeostatic systems on food preference [2], humans can (to a certain point) regulate this internal urges. The regulation of those urges can be influenced by other factors, such as individual (physiological, psychological), environmental (culture), context dependent (time and place) and the food factors itself (packaging, nutritional information etc.) [3]. The influence of different factors on our food choices creates a subjective reality. The subjective reality is a personally constructed reality, that is usually different than the objective reality, that is based on scientific research [3]. In cases where specific dietary guidelines need to be followed, the difference between the subjective and the objective reality should be minimized. 
In my master's thesis, the goal is to create a mobile application, which would help the users to close the gap between their subjective and the existing objective reality. For this, the masters thesis will be divided into three parts. In the first part, the theory of food perception will be described, in the second part, different diet related diseases will analyzed and in the last part a mobile application will be created. The mobile application would allow the user to record and analyze their food choices via taking photos of the meals and keeping records of them (manual input of eaten food possible object detection algorithms). The analysis of the appropriateness of the eaten food and further suggestions will be based on the analytical analysis of the literature from the fields of food perception and diet related diseases.
!!References
[1]Eaton, S. B., Konner, M., & Shostak, M. “ Stone agers in the fast lane: chronic degenerative diseases in evolutionary perspective.” The American journal of medicine, vol. 84(4), pp. 739-749, 1988.
[2]Paul, L., Miley, W. M., & Baenninger, R. “Mouse killing by rats: Roles of hunger and thirst in its initiation and maintenance.” Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology, vol. 76(2), pp.  242 - 249, 1971.
[3] Sijtsema, Siet, et al. "Variables influencing food perception reviewed for consumer-oriented product development." Critical reviews in food science and nutrition, vol. 42(6), pp. 565-581, 2002.

