... title: Vicarious sensorimotor activation and dispositional empathy



Abstract

Embodied approach to social cognition suggests that the central aspect to the understanding of others relies on the activation of neural structures involved in our own personally experienced actions, bodily states, and emotions. Vicarious sensorimotor resonance, i.e. brain activation resulting from observing other people’s actions or sensations, is believed to contribute to the neural underpinnings of empathy. To further explore the associations between the vicarious oscillatory activity and empathy as a personality trait, we used data from two EEG studies measuring resonant responses of sensorimotor cortex to the pain and touch of others. The aim was to assess the correlation of event-related desynchronization (ERD) and synchronization (ERS) of sensorimotor mu and beta rhythms with behavioral measure of dispositional empathy.
In study 1, participants (N = 37) observed videos showing ethnic ingroup (‘white’) or outgroup (‘black’) hands being either penetrated with needle or touched with a cotton swab [2]. The stimuli were presented on a monitor placed in front of the participants. In study 2 (N = 29), identical stimuli were used, but were presented on a monitor placed over the participant's hand, to increase bodily self-attribution of the target hand. In both studies, participants filled out the Interpersonal Reactivity Index (IRI) questionnaire, measuring four dimensions of empathy: perspective taking, fantasy scale, empathic concern, and personal distress. Event-related spectral power modulation (ERD/ERS) was assessed for each subject within the frequency bands of 7-12 Hz (mu) and 13-30 Hz (beta) over sensorimotor cortex. We used the difference between ‘pain’ and ‘touch’ mean ERD/ERS conditions in hand treatment time window to determine its correlation with the participants’ scores in the four dimensions of IRI. There was no significant difference between the correlation coefficients of the two experiments, thus we ran the analysis with the data from both studies combined. We found significant relationship between beta ERD/ERS and Perspective Taking scores (lower ERD values indicate higher resonance: p = 0.011, r = -0.282). Our preliminary findings suggest that emphatic sensorimotor response might be positively associated with the participants’ perspective taking skills, i.e. the ability to spontaneously transpose into others’ feelings and states. Vicarious sensorimotor activation therefore might play an important role in our social perception.
## References
[1] C. Keysers, J. H. Kaas, and V. Gazzola, “Somatosensation in social perception,” *Nature Reviews Neuroscience*, vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 417–428, Jun. 2010.
[2] I. Riečanský, N. Paul, S. Kölble, S. Stieger, and C. Lamm, “Beta oscillations reveal ethnicity ingroup bias in sensorimotor resonance to pain of others,” *Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience*, vol. 10, no. 7, pp. 893–901, Jul. 2015.

