... title: The Self - Phenomenological Accounts of Psychosis and Mystical Experiences



Abstract

Speaking about the self might often be confusing, since it depends a lot on the background of people with whom you discuss what the concept of the self actually means to them. The topic I am concerned with attempts to define the self as the core of subjective experience, as the cardinal point by which experience is structured and shaped. It is something so immideate in our experience that we are hardly aware of it reflectively. Moreover, it seems that the fundamental aspect of this „core self“ (minimal self) is that it cannot be the object of our awareness. It is transparent and pre-reflective. 
Every experience we are making is not just an experience, but it`s part of the experience that there is someone making this experience. For instance, when I look at a red wall, there is not just the experience of the „red wall“, but it seems to be integral to my experience that I am experiencing it; this feeling of being someone that is rooted in the world. The importance of the experienced dichotomy between the self and the world becomes apparant when the boundaries become vague or even dissolve. 
It has been argued that mental illnesses like psychosis and especially schizophrenia are the result of a disturbance of this feeling of being a self, rooted in the world (feeling of ipseity).  The self-disorder consists of two complementary aspects that can only be understood in their mutual elucidation. The first is hyper-reflexivity and refers to a form of “exaggerated self-consciousness“.More precisely, it denotes the shift of what has been a formerly automatic or tacit aspect of experience into reflective, thematic consciousness. A patient thereby no longer inhabits what was a part of herself before but experiences herself as an external object. Complementary to hyper-reflexivity there occurs a diminishment of self affection. Self-affection refers to the basal pre-reflective self-manifestation of consciousness. “Affection”, in this sense, has nothing to do with liking or keenness but it denotes that consciousness affects itself: “It is manifesting itself to itself in a way that involves no distinction between a subject and an object.”

Apart from schizophrenia mystical experiences can have similar characteristics of disturbances of ipseity. Some people might argue that the underlying mechnisms might be similar or even the same with the difference that they are  often culturally shared. Moreover mystical experiences might be induced or voluntarily accomplished by contemplative techniques like meditation, trance, schamanism etc. It`s also claimed that mystical experiences are transient, and often don`t last longer than a few days maximum. This however is controversial as long term spiritual practise might result in a permanent shift in how we experience the world. 

My interest and endevour in this work is to shine further light on the topic by carrying out phenomenological interviews with people who either underwent severe psychotic episodes or who had mystical experiences (mainly people who practice Zazen for many years). I will attempt to analyse the data by the concepts and frameworks mainly used in phenomenological psychiatry. 

[1] Foreman; The Problem of Pure Consciousness, Mysticism and Philosophy, Oxford Press 1990
[2] Foreman; Mysticism Mind Consciousness, State University of New York Press 1999
[3] Sass, Parnass; Zahavi ,Phenomenological Psychopathology and Schizophrenia: Contemporary 
Approaches and MisunderstandingsThe Johns Hopkins University Press 2011

