... title: Interaction of Psycholinguistics and Pragmatics from the view of Gricean Cooperation Principle



Abstract

In the master's thesis we deal with an analysis of the influence of H. P Grice's work on the current field of psycholinguistics. We provide an analysis of Grice's Cooperative principle and theory of meaning and name examples. This knowledge is then used for comparison and correlation with the works of psycholinguists, theoretical and empirical. All of the gained knowledge is then used to propose an experiment of our own.
The paper can be seen as consisting of three parts: the theoretical analysis of Grice's work, the work of Michael Tomasello and experiments closely related to Gricean views (by Noveck and Colston in their respective research).
First psycholinguist, whose efforts we study is Michael Tomasello, mainly through his book Origins of Human Communication (2008). Tomasello offers a pragmatical, usage-based view on communication and justifies this by providing relevant experimental results. He argues that nonverbal communication in apes is the predecessor of human verbal communication by showing the similarities in usage and function. Gestural communication in apes shares the same model of intentional behaviour as does the human language. Yet there are differences. Humans use their communication channels cooperatively, where apes do not. Apes use their communication "just" in a reflexive (e.g. subconscious warning calls when a predator is seen) or competitive ("I want you to do something" in contrast with "I want us to do something together") manner. Tomasello proposes the idea of Shared intentionality as an explanation of the acquisition of the unique human way of communicating. He considers how the first baby gestures, first pointing and later pantomiming, take on meaning and send out information about its intentions and how they correlate with language acquisition. We provide a Gricean view on Tomasello's three motivations for communication - requesting, informing and sharing along with their respective grammatical dimension. We consider how Grice has influenced Tomasello and also how Tomasello's theories influence the view on the work of Grice.
Other two psycholinguists with whose this thesis works are Ira Noveck and Herbert L. Colston. We look on two influential papers with interesting experimental results from these scientists. Noveck analyzed how the Gricean maxim of quantity, the scalar implicature to be precise, is comprehended differently in children and adults. He argues that children tend to understand utterances more in a terms of formal logic, whereas adults as more experienced language users use a more pragmatical approach. Three experiments are studied and the implications of the results are analyzed. 
Colston experiments involve also people, in this case only adults, and their comprehension of Gricean maxims. Colston's interest lies in the comprehension of figurative language, in this case irony. We follow his summary of various theories in this matter and the attempts to prove or disprove them through experiments. The theories join in two conditions for a correct use of irony; allusion to violated expectations and pragmatical insincerity. The second condition is disproved by unambiguous results of the experiments and is replaced by Colston's own theory. The most important experiment, where he proposes this theory involving flouting of Gricean maxims, is looked upon more closely for further use.
We conclude our paper with a proposition of an original experiment for irony comprehension in children. We combine ideas of the former two experiments. We argue, that children's ability for irony comprehension closely correlates with their evolving skill in language pragmatics. We work out the details of the experiment and defend its relevance for cognitive science.

References:
Grice, H.P. (1989). Studies in the Way of Words. Harvard University Press.
Tomasello, M. (2008). Origins of Human Communication. MIT Press.
Noveck, I. A. (2001). When children are more logical than adults: Experimental investigations of scalar implicature. Cognition, 78(2), 165-188.

