... title: Embedding social behaviour in emotion in fuzzy animats



Abstract

According to evolution all life on Earth is related and as a consequence of this, structures and functions are shared between species. In this view, the study of biological and cognitive phenomena in animals sheds light on processes and functions of the human body and mind. This is also true of emotions, affective states that can be seen as “programs” that orchestrate correct behaviour, from bodily preparations to action readiness and execution, for given historically recurring situations [1]. Thus, emotions are hard-wired responses of which perhaps the best example is fear which prepares the body for the fight or flight response and shifts attention to potentially dangerous stimuli, among other things. These responses also act as cues indicating affective states to other animals and consequently serve as the basis for emotional contagion – transfer of emotions between individuals [2]. Similar behaviour in similar situations is a potential mechanism for group coordination, while positive affect among members may bring about group cohesion, and thus emotions and affect may play a crucial role in group formation [2].
Artificial life, a computational paradigm of modelling principles of living systems, offers a setting in which these speculations may be tested through simulation. I postulate that emotions and their expression are the substrate of social behaviour in animals and test this hypothesis through computational simulation of evolution in a virtual environment, populated by animal automatons – animats. Animats’ behaviour is modelled with fuzzy cognitive maps, structured to represent sensations, drives, internal states, emotions and motor actions which include emotional displays. Fuzzy cognitive maps (FCM) are a type of knowledge representation that models causality between concepts and inference patterns in dynamic systems [3] and are thus an apt model to study dynamics and causality in artificial agents. My hypothesis postulates that emotion expression and contagion will motivate animats to form groups and express group-like behaviour, without explicit modelling of social behaviour. Social behaviour is thus seen as an emergent phenomenon and emotions as the cement holding the society together. It is too early to talk about results, but since an FCM represents a system’s causality, positive results will prompt analysis of its causal links and perhaps bring new insights on importance of emotion in social behaviour.
!!References
[1] L. Cosmides and J. Tooby. “Evolutionary psychology and the emotions,” in Handbook of emotions 2, pp.91-115. 2000.
[2] J. R. Spoor and J. R. Kelly. "The evolutionary significance of affect in groups: Communication and group bonding." Group processes & intergroup relations vol. 7, n. 4, pp.398-412. 2004.
[3] R. Gras, D. Devaurs, A. Wozniak and A. Aspinall. “An individual-based evolving predator-prey ecosystem simulation using a fuzzy cognitive map as the behavior model.” Artificial life, vol. 15, n. 4, pp.423-463. 2009.

