... title: EFFECT OF THE SENSORIMOTOR CONTINGENCY OF VISUAL STIMULI ON ANIMALS



Abstract

In 2011, there were some series of efforts made in the Saimiri monkey(Saimiri sciureus) lab of the University of Vienna to train them to work with the touch-screen. The goal was that a monkey touches certain image out of given multiple images on the screen, then the monkey receives the reward if the touched image was correct in terms of a simple grammar such as one used in the work of Tecumseh and Hauser (2004).


To achieve this goal, a monkey must learn that 1) if one touches an image on the screen, one can receive a reward, and 2) when there are multiple images on the screen, they pertain different meanings, therefore, it could bring different results, so to speak, reward or no reward.


Two main problems emerged which can happen on works with any animal species. 1) Monkeys were afraid of the new object itself, the touch-screen. 2) Monkeys perceived the touch-screen as a whole object no matter what images were shown on it.


To help them to perceive an image as an independent object from the screen, we made the image on the screen to move around randomly which helped them to some degree. They eventually understood the concept, but it took quite long time. This study focuses on facilitating this learning process.


To help animals to perceive an image on the screen as an object, the visual sensorimotor contingency was considered in this study. The definition of 'sensorimotor contingency' in this study is simple which is that an animal acts in certain way then the animal's environment including any object in it presents itself in the corresponding way to the animal's action. For instance, if one goes around a piano toward the left, one will see the left side of the piano. Many animals with the decent visual system including human learn about any novel object in this way, by acting on it. Held and Hein (1963), O'Regan and Noë (2001).


In this study, one device, which can provide the sensorimotor contingent image to the viewer in a close distance, was developed. This device consists of the camera and a computer. The camera captures the posture of the monkey and the monitor shows the corresponding side of an object according to the animal’s posture.


There was severe time limit on the period I could test on Saimiri monkeys, hence this work did not provide any specific task or rewarding system, but only the device itself and the recording of their reactions.

Due to lack of rewarding, the monkeys lost their interests on the device very quickly, therefore, the result data was not meaningful. Their reactions were active and positive on the visual stimuli on the screen. (‘Active and positive’ means that they were not afraid of the monitor nor image and they actively tried to examine the object on the screen. This is not a conclusion, but only a mere preliminary observation. There is no prominent conclusion so far-JUN.2012) This could be due to the sensorimotor contingency it showed, but also there are a number of other possible reasons for their behaviors such as that some of them already actively worked on another touch-screen task for a while, simply they were in the group situation so that they could be bolder, and so on.


To clarify the effect of the sensorimotor contingency of the computer image on animals, more specific tasks have to be given to animals to rule out other possibilities.



- REFERENCES -
[1] Tecumseh, W., Hauser, M. D., A Computational constraints on syntactic processing in a nonhuman primate, 2004
[2] Held, R., Hein, A, Movement-produced stimulation in the development of visually guided behavior, 1963
[3] O’Regan, J. K., Noë, A., A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness, 2001

