... title: Beyond Constructivism: Exploring Novel Learning Paradigms and Their Implications for Educational Robotics



Abstract

Developments in the fields of AI and robotics have led to an increasing interest towards using humanoid robots in education. But what does it mean for a robot to assume a role of an educator amid increasing (technological and societal) complexity? What kind of goals, behavioral protocols and normative frameworks should a robotic educator incorporate? How should we approach conceptualization and design of the structure of a relationship between a robotic educator and a human leaner? 
To answer these questions, we ought first to define what is understood by knowledge, learning and, more broadly, education and the role we wish to ascribe to it. Dominant approaches to education, also in the field of educational robotics, have been largely shaped by constructivism and, more recently, constructionism [1]. Unlike traditional positivist approach, where knowledge is conceived as some sort of representation of “external truth”, constructivist paradigm construes knowledge as shaped by subjective experience of the learner. Despite its predominance and, no doubt, practical usefulness due to its orientation toward active, problem-solving and embodied learning, I believe that both subject-centered constructivism and social constructionism are epistemically insufficient if one chooses to conceptualize knowledge neither as an independent entity “out there”, nor as an individual-based subjective construct, but as a complex, non-lineal space of emergence. 
My research is an attempt to move beyond constructivism and to hypothesize what would such a conceptual and epistemic shift mean for the future of educational robotics. With this aim in mind, I will first explore recent works at the intersection of complex system theory and philosophy of education [2] and examine their possible points of intersection with the dynamic enactivism paradigm as formulated by Varela and Maturana [3]. Using the insights gained, I will proceed to formulate an education and learning framework that will ground my further investigation into the field of educational robotics. Seeing that this is an exploratory project, my end goal is not to propose a concrete architecture and its underlying algorithmic structure of an educational robot. Rather, I aim to suggest possible answers to the questions raised in the beginning of this abstract, with a broader intent to conjecture what the future of educational robotics could look like in line with the proposed education framework. 
[1] O. Mubin, C. J. Stevens, S. Shahid, A. A. Mahmud, and J.-J. Dong, “A Review Of The Applicability Of Robots In Education,” Technology for Education and Learning, vol. 1, no. 1, 2013.
[2] B. Davis and D. J. Sumara, Complexity and education: inquiries into learning, teaching, and research. London: Routledge, 2014.
[3] J. Proulx. Some differences between Maturana and Varela's theory of cognition and constructivism. Complicity: an International Journal of Complexity and Education. 5. 11-26, 2008.

