... title: !!!! A Computational Model of Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation for Decision Making and Action Selection



Abstract

!!!! A Computational Model of Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation for Decision Making and Action Selection

Motivation is a fundamental force which moves an organism into performing certain activities. It is not a unitary phenomenon, as it can differ in both the intensity (level) and the type (orientation). The type of motivation is determined by the different attitudes, goals and reasons that give rise to an action. This leads to the most basic distinction between intrinsic motivation, which refers to doing something because it is inherently interesting or enjoyable, and extrinsic motivation which denotes activities leading to a separable outcome [1]. Motivation is a classic psychological topic, however, its importance has recently been noticed in other disciplines as well, making it a stimulating interdisciplinary research subject. 
In our current project we are developing a computational model of extrinsic and intrinsic motivation for action selection and decision making (two of the most basic problems in intelligent systems). It will consist of a few main blocks: Internal Physiological Space, Motivation block, Return Predictor (Learning block), and Action Selection block. The internal physiological space will represent all of the agent's needs and motivations in one multidimensional space. The motivation block will help to link the internal physiological space to the agent's external environment. It will also compute a list of weighted admissible actions for the action selection block. The learning block will be based on the framework of Reinforcement learning (concretely, Temporal Difference Q-learning). This framework allows using the action reward (or reinforcement) as a source of feedback about the performance [2]. Finally, the action selection block will use a few different algorithms to maintain the balance between exploration and exploitation. In our model, motivation will be used for both goal and reward derivation, and will influence decision making, action selection, and the level of exploration.
The model will be implemented in an incremental fashion using computer simulation. We will start with the motivation systems of a single need, increasing the complexity to the multiple needs system. Finally, the subsystem of intrinsic motivation will be incorporated into the extrinsic system.
We believe that this project will allow us to approach questions important for both psychology and computer science. Psychologists could benefit from learning more about the functional nature of intrinsic motivation (especially about different sub-types of intrinsic motivation), from possible mechanisms which connect extrinsic needs and intrinsic motivation into one coherent system, and from a clear formalization of psychological concepts such as “joy”, “curiosity”, “challenge” and similar. For computer scientists this project could provide useful insights into the advantages of designing motivation based learning systems, as well as the benefits or downsides of intrinsic motivation in simulated agents. Last but not least, this project will allow us to explore the philosophical question of whether it makes sense to design computational systems based on biological models. 

!! References
[1] R. M. Ryan and E. L.  Deci. “Intrinsic and extrinsic motivations: Classic definitions and new directions.” Contemporary educational psychology, vol. 25(1), pp. 54-67. 2000.
[2] S. J. Russell,  P. Norvig, E. Davis. “Reinforcement Learning” in Artificial intelligence: a modern approach, 3rd ed., Englewood Cliffs: Prentice hall, 2010, pp. 830-859

