... title: When Does Prosocial Behavior Lead to More Prosocial Behavior



Abstract

!!!! When Does Prosocial Behavior Lead to More Prosocial Behavior

According to [3], making a prosocial act, beneficial for society, might lead a person to subsequently less altruistic, or even harmful behavior in the near future. This effect is called licensing 

effect.
According to [1], licensing effect only takes place, if the initial prosocial act was costless, i.e. does not impose any cost on the agent. If the initial prosocial behavior, in contrast, does 

imply any cost to the agent, i.e. agent has to spend his money or time to engage in this prosocial behavior, agent tends to behave prosocially in the near future.
Hence, by the example granted by the authors of [1], if you oblige yourself to answer some questions in a survey in future, which does not imply you any cost at the moment, you tend to behave less 

prosocially the next time, you are faced with similar choice. Yet, when you actually answer a few questions in a survey, which costs you some time, you tend to behave more prosocially in the 

future.

I believe a more continual understanding of this phenomenon would be beneficial, rather than binary division into costly and costless. 

In my experiment, I am about to approach random people on the street and ask them, if they have a few minutes to participate in an experiment. When a person agrees to participating, I label this 

willingness to participate as a prosocial act. Then I will assign each participant into random class by paying him. This payment will be executed right after he agrees to participate in the 

experiment. Payment classes, depending on what participants get for participating:
*nothing - this should make their participation in the experiment a costly prosocial act 
*fair monetary compensation - this should make their participation a costless prosocial act, or behavior very close to a costless prosocial act, since they are going to be compensated for their effort. 
*less than fair price
*material gift, like a box of chocolates 
*affective gift, such as written thank you note from a faculty representative

Afterwards, I need to determine for each participant, if he is subsequently going to behave in prosocial manner. For this purpose, I will use a dictator game from [2].

After assessing, how prosocially did each of the classes behave in subsequent test a more continual scale of costliness of prosocial behavior is expected to arise.

!! References
[1] A. Gneezy, A. Imas, A. Brown, L. D. Nelson, M. I Norton "Paying to Be Nice: Consistency and Costly Prosocial Behavior." Management Science, vol. 58, pp. 179-187, Jan. 2012.
[2] K. Gray, A. F. Ward, M. I. Norton, "Paying it forward: generalized reciprocity and the limits of generosity." Journal of Experimental Psychology: General  Dec. 17 2012. 
[3] N. Mazar, C. B. Zhong, "Do green products make us better people." Psychological science, vol. 21, pp. 494-498, 2010.

