... title: NeuroBot



Abstract

Despite many years of studies and research, the complete description of mechanisms that allow humans to create cognitive complex maps of environment has not yet been found. Cognitive robotics tries to answer this question by studying different hypotheses through their realization in both real and simulated agents. The main goal of the thesis is to propose, implement and test neural network based system in the task of performing actions on the basis of sensory inputs. This project uses a mobile robotic platform with a differential drive in a real world environment, therefore our model can be compared with a biological one, where a neural net is used for learning and controlling actions. Thus we can say, that this project is an interdisciplinary project that combines cognitive computational neuroscience and robotics.
      The goal of the project is to implement a neuronal network which can control a robot with a differential drive system. The robot should learn to move about in its environment without colliding with its surroundings. The whole robot is a small mobile robotic platform with a size of 12 x 9 x 10cm, weighting about 1.5kg. The whole system is divided into four layers. Two electric drives and wheels are implemented in the first layer. The second layer contains sensors for interaction with its environment. There are three types of sensors used. Eight infrared sensors with a binary output are used for longer range obstacle detection. Four color contrast sensors with a binary output are mounted on the bottom of the chassis. Information about the surface under the robot can be gained from these sensors, which can be used as an additional information when navigating through a 2D environment.
      Two tactile sensors (left and right) are in the front of the robot – these can be used by the neural network training to indicate negative feedback (a “punishment”). The third layer of the robot is used to control the whole robot and contains an 8-bit microprocessor (an Atmel ATMega8). The microprocessor controls the electric drives and measures data from the sensors. The last layer contains the wireless communication interface used to communicate with the computer. The microprocessor has too little computational power, and it was therefore necessary to implement the neural network on an external computer. The microprocessor acts only as a data acquisition system and a drive control system.
      The robot should be controlled by a (recurrent) neural network. It can be controlled in real time using a keyboard, where the whole process is recorded into data files. This data can be later used as a training set for the network. The environment for the robot is an “arena” with a total surface area of 1m^2, with obstacles. After finishing the implementation of a (recurrent) neural network we will probably move onto more complex types of neural networks. We would like to implement more complex learning algorithms, that use reward/punishment learning. In this mode the network will have to be pretrained, as the robot is far slower than a computer simulation.
[1]Kvasnička V., Beňušková., Pospíchal J., Farkaš I., Tiňo P. a Kráľ A., Introduction to the theory of neural network. Iris: Bratislava 1997 
[2]Papauschek C., Atonomous Learning and Exploration. Special Topic of Interest Module  Semester Project, Winter semester 2010/11

