... title: Cost of Revolution with Focus on Social-Economic Change



Abstract

In this project I examine: what are the costs of revolutions, can revolutions be modelled as radical change in a system and what causes contribute in these changes. My supervisor for this project is Prof. Werner Callebaut from the KLI and with the project I try to connect my background discipline (economics) with cognitive sciences in one of the most important topic of several disciplines: change (and adaption).

Before we examine the cost of revolution we have to understand the structure of revolutions, this leads to a sub-question: does all or most features of a system change at once or does one or several “entrenched” (described further) feature change and with time causes the development of a different system? I argue for the latter that revolutionary change is a causal development of a new system. Wimsatt’s Generative Entrenchment (GE) Model [1] is based on Herbert Simon’s Developmental Lock, the idea is that we have for a lock with 10 wheels each with 100 positions, 10 of which are solutions for each wheel and when the position of a wheel is changed the solutions of each wheel downstream (to the left) of it are randomly reassigned. Changing a wheel thus creating a new combination has a chance of 1 in 10n(n is 1 to 10 from right to left) for being a solution.  Thus change of an upstream feature has a high chance of changing the features downstream arguing that adaptive features are more downstream and upstream features are more entrenched (conservative for change as they have more influence on the whole system).

An example for a model of social-economics change is János Kornai [2] general casual model for the development of socialist systems. He models the socialist system in five causal blocks from left to right: 1st block – the undivided authority of the Marxist-Leninist Party; 2nd block – the commanding position of the state and quasi-state property; 3rd – the dominance of bureaucratic coordination; 4th block – bargaining plan, quantity pursuit, paternalism, etc; 5th block – forced growth, chronic shortage in economics, etc. Thus to achieve relevant change the 1st block (containing the entrenched features) has to change inducing the development of a new system. This also supports the latter version for the sub-question.

The main question was: what is the cost of revolution? Variables for measurement could be: loss of lives, decrease in social and personal wealth (recession of the economy), etc. (during the revolution). These are variables for describing uncertainty thus the real cost of change is the enhancement of uncertainty itself; whether the new system will be superior or inferior to the previous one (as seen before the change of an entrenched feature results in a new system).

What are the causes of this high risk-taking from individuals to create a revolution (which in many cases fails)? This suggests heuristic based decision-making [3] as in most cases the “rational” decision would be not taking this high risk. Inspired by Herbert Simon’s Bounded Rationality many heuristics have an important role in revolutions: imitation (the goal of the 1848 wave of European revolutions was 1789 French Revolution, the 1956 Hungarian revolution was preceded by the 1955 Declaration of Austrian Independence, etc.), emotions (hatred against the current system, need for change, etc.) and the accumulation of these factors overwhelm the risk-evasive behavior causing radical change (revolution). On the other hand the system has resilience against change and change can only occur when this resilience weakens and the pressure for change, discussed above, is present (e.g. 1789 French Revolution and 1917 Russian Revolution) while in system with strong resilience this change is suppressed (the pressure for change, revolutions fail).

[1] William C. Wimsatt (1986) – Developmental Constraints, Generative Entrenchment and the Innate-Acquired Distinction
[2] János Kornai (1993) – The Socialist System in: János Kornai (2007) – Socialism, Capitalism, Democracy and Transition
[3] Gerd Gigerenzer and Reinhard Selten (editors, 2001) – Bounded Rationality: The Adaptive Toolbox

