... title: Visual attention, decision making and scene description revealed by bee swarm analysis



Abstract

Attention stands as a fundamental capacity of our cognitive systems, for it enables us to effectively use its limited resources in a flexible and dynamical way [1]. Therefore, it is not surprising that a considerable amount of research has focused on that topic. However, most of this research has been mainly carried out on visual attention by using static stimuli in highly controlled experimental settings. Although this provided valuable insights concerning the basic mechanisms underlying visual attention, very little is known about visual attention in dynamic and social situations with less simplified stimuli [2]. Thus, conducting research using closer to real-life situations as stimuli, would significantly contribute to a more complete understanding of visual attention, while it would allow looking into social attention more reliably. This, in turn, could provide a better understanding of phenomena based on social attention such as, social cognition, social learning and the like.
In the present study, we hypothesized that visual and social cues capture visual attention, and also lead to an increase in reported interest. The stimuli consist of a set of surveillance video recordings from a European metropolitan subway. 150 subjects (middle European university students) watched 4 screens, each displaying 1 video simultaneously, and indicated, using a joystick, when their interest was triggered. Additionally, we measured the resting potential of the retina using electro-oculography, a technique which allows us to record the eye movements of the subject to further determine eye-gaze direction. Bee swarm analysis allows localizing the visual attention locus on the selected frames, in order to identify both visual and social attention triggers.
Preliminary analysis suggest a number of visual cues, as potential triggers of social and visual attention, in dynamic and more close to real-life like stimuli. Therefore visual cues are categorized as visual (movement, colors, appearance and similar) or social (human interaction, manipulation of objects, interaction with pets and similar). Consistent with previous studies, attention is not-randomly distributed. Visual attention and cognitive attention are correlated.
We could identify a number of visual and social triggers of attention, and thus extend our knowledge about the mechanisms of attention in complex dynamic social situations. We could shed light on some cognitive phenomena, such as social cognition and social learning. Moreover, our results demonstrate the importance and benefits of studying social attention by using more complex dynamic and closer to real-life stimuli.

[1] Cohen A. (2003). Selective attention. Encyclopedia of cognitive science. Nature Publishing Group (Macmillan).
[2] Birmingham E., Bischof W. F, & Kingstone A. (2008). Social attention and real-world scenes: The roles of action, competition and social content. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 61, 986-998.

