... title: DEFINING MUSIC INDUCED PLEASURE AND REWARD IN THE CURRENT NEUROSCIENTIFIC AND PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE – A SYSTEMATIC INTEGRATIVE LITERATURE REVIEW



Abstract

By now the influence of music on human affect has been widely researched from a variety of perspectives: it is known that music can cause a large range of emotions [1], even seemingly contradictory ones [2].  Research is conducted with focus on rewarding and pleasurable effects of music especially in the fields of musicology, experimental psychology and in the various sub disciplines of neuroscience, such as affective neuroscience and neuroaesthetics. As a matter of fact, music is a valuable means in the field of affective neuroscience since it can be used to gain more profound knowledge on human emotions on a more general level [3]. While interdiciplinarity leads to a more comprehensive understanding of phenomena, it can also lead to an incoherent manner of using the most crucial terminology. The primary goal of this project is to clarify the major terminological differences and similarities between music studies from the fields of psychology and neuroscience. Awareness of the terminological differences and similarities is hoped to make the comparison of different studies in the respective fields easier.
The research question of this project is what are the major differences underlying the terms of reward and pleasure in psychological and neuroscientific literature? For this purpose a comprehensive literature research is being undertaken. Seven crucial databases from the fields of psychology and neuroscience are searched for articles from the past 20 years concentrating on terms of music and reward or pleasure in various combinations. In order to be able to answer the research question, the use of the terminology in the articles is evaluated according to the following three criteria: Which cognitive processes (such as memory, attention and evaluation) and psychological concepts (such as wanting, valence, arousal and emotion) underlie the researched phenomena of pleasure and reward; how are reward and pleasure researched in experimental conditions; and finally, how accurately are the terms defined in the literature. Also the major differences and gaps where more research is required are pointed out. The results will be reported in a tabulated and in a narrative form.
!! REFERENCES
[1] P.N. Juslin et al., “How does music evoke emotions: Exploring the underlying mechanisms,“ in Handbook of music and emotion: Theory, research and applications, 1st ed., P. N. Juslin, J.A. Sloboda,  Eds. New York: Oxford University Press, 2010, ch. 22, pp. 605-642.
[2] D. Huron, “Why is sad music pleasurable? A possible role for prolactin,” Musicae Scientiae, Vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 146-158, 2012.
[3] S. Koelsch, “Emotion and Music”, in The Cambridge handbook of human affective neuroscience, 1st ed., J. Armony and P. Vuilleumier Eds. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2013, ch.12, pp. 286-303.

