... title: Preservation of Moral Knowledge in Patients with Frontotemporal Dementia and Their Legal Responsibility



Abstract

Morality is defined as a code of values and customs that lead social behaviour in all rational human beings. Neural underpinnings in the brain consist of several different regions; the main one is ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC) which applies moral and emotional values to social events and cooperates in the processes of the theory of mind and empathy. Important regions in the morality network are also orbitofrontal cortex and ventrolateral cortex, amygdalae, anterior insula and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) [1]. Studies with healthy subjects and patients with frontotemporal dementia (FTD) revealed notable distinctions in moral knowledge between groups. One of the earliest sign of FTD is drastically changed personality and loss of moral compass. Patients can become aggressive, insulting and often involved in traffic accidents. In some cases, they start to steal or even develop pedophilic tendencies. Studies have shown that patients with FTD exhibit lack of emotional moral knowledge but keep moral sense for rational dilemmas where utilitarian solutions are required [2]. VMPFC as the first damaged region in morality network causes lack of moral knowledge, especially in emotionally determined situations when a person can direct harm to another (human)being. One example is an emotional dilemma in which you are standing next to a stranger on the bridge when you see the train driving toward the group of people; if you push the stranger from the bridge the group of people will survive, inversely they will die. Since healthy individuals would normally hesitate to push the man from the bridge, patients with FTD would do so without guilty conscience [3]. To find out how patients with FTD interact in social circumstances they will be presented with several moral dilemmas divided into emotional and rational ones. Dilemmas will be introduced by written scenarios, pictures and through talk. We will measure responses, reaction times and overall behaviour, and compare their results with the control group of healthy participants. We hypothesise that patients with FTD will exhibit different moral knowledge compared to healthy subjects, especially in personal or emotional moral dilemmas. Our expectations can contribute to better understanding of changes in behaviour and moral knowledge in patients with FTD. Furthermore, we can shed a light on how to proceed with these patients in trials after they committed a criminal act.

References

[1] L. Pascual, P. Rodrigues and D. Gallardo-Pujol, “How does Morality Work in the Brain? A Functional and Structural Perspective of Moral Behavior”, Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience, vol. 7, no. 65, pp. 1 -8, 2013.
[2] M. F., Mendez, “The Neurobiology of Moral Behavior. Review and Neuropsychiatric Implications”, CNS Spectrums, vol. 14, no. 11, 1 - 25, 2009.
[3] J.D., Greene, R.B., Sommerville, L.E., Nystrom, J.M., Darley and J.D., Cohen, “A fMRI Investigation of Emotional Engagement in Moral Judgment”, Science, vol. 293, no. 14, pp. 2105 - 2108, 2001.

