... title: Processing of words and pseudo-words in patients with dementia



Abstract

Processing of words and pseudo-words in patients with dementia

In our study we are focusing on words and pseudo-words processing in patients suffering from dementia. One of the early problems of patients with dementia is difficulties with naming and word finding, something that suggests a decay of lexical representations. The aim of the study, based on the assumption that pseudo-words processing is a stage process, is to find out how this decay progresses and to find out at which stage difficulties occur in patients with dementia. We are going to approach this issue by using an acceptability task for words and pseudo-words, which violate various aspects of word formation in Slovenian language. 

BACKGROUND
In today’s society, dementia has become a frequently diagnosed disease, which also affects language abilities of an individual. These language difficulties appear early in the disease course and can be observed in different forms of dementia. In Alzheimer’s disease, for example, these difficulties can be observed in verbal fluency, naming – particularly of biological items, where semantic knowledge plays an important role – and also on discourse level processing [3]. In the present study we will focus on lexical level rather than discourse. We will investigate lexical representations and their decay by looking at single word processing of real words as well as of pseudo-words. Each language has its own word formation rules, which tell us how to form new words. For example, nouns denoting masculine agents can in Slovenian derive only from verbal base (e.g. plesalec “dancer”, derives from the verb plesati “to dance”: when building the word we add the suffix -lec to the base ples-). Of course, not all suffixes can be attached to all bases, thus word formation rules such as the one described above have to be followed when a new word is created [2]. If we do not follow these rules, we form a word which could phonologically sound like a word of a certain language, e.g. from Slovenian, but it is not part of its vocabulary – in this case we can talk about word formation violations. In the study we will focus on three types of violations: thematic, in which there are violations of the basic relationships concerning agent roles (e.g. *umiralec: somebody who is dying, *dyer), categorical, in which the lexical category of the base (e.g. verb or noun) is inappropriate (e.g. *avtomobilec: *car-er), and aspectual ones, in which specific word formation rules about verbal aspect  are being violated (*preplavalec: (*verb, deriving from a perfective form of the noun swimmer). In terms of pseudo-word processing, we follow Libben [1], who suggested that processing of pseudo-words is a four-stage process. This was more recently upgraded by Manouilidou [2]. At first stage the scan of the string from left to right happens, during which all lexicalized substrings are being exposed (such as pre-plava-lec). Manouilidou adds that this is the stage at which all the non-words are being rejected. At second stage morphological computation takes place, at which interpretable structures are created from lexical substrings (pre-[plava-lec] and [pre-plava]-lec). According to Manouilidou, this is the stage at which pseudo-words with categorical violations are being rejected. She also adds that at this stage, before Libben's third stage, thematic processing of a word takes place. At the third stage an interpretation for each of these representations happens (in which the combination pre-[plava-lec] would mean someone who swims, while the combination [pre-plava]-lec would give no interpretation) and at the fourth stage, the speaker chooses between the interpretations (prefers pre-[plava-lec] rather than the second combination) [2].

METHOD
Stimuli: We have studied the rules of Slovene word formation for nouns denoting masculine agents (e.g, igralec “actor”) and violated these rules in three levels, thus creating thematic, categorical and aspectual violations. We have also added a group of words for male agents (e.g. bralec “reader”), which do not violate these rules, and also a group of non-words, which do not violate the rules, but nevertheless still do not exist in Slovene language and which do not carry any meaning (e.g *dovina). In each group we have selected a pool of 30 words, which were chosen according to their frequency, tested in the Corpus of Slovene language FidaPlus. The chosen stimuli will be first tested on a group of healthy participants, native speakers of Slovene, to observe whether they recognise them as being violations or ordinary Slovenian words. In this way we will form a group of words, which will first be presented to the control group and later also to the patient with Alzheimer’s disease.

Task: We will use an acceptability task, in which we will focus on the patterns of rejection/acceptance for the presented pseudo-words. At the same time we will also take into consideration the type of violation. We will show the participants the list of words and pseudo-words and ask them whether or not the presented word could be a Slovene word. Participants would have to respond by choosing YES or NO. In case of YES, participants would have to provide the word’s meaning as well.

EXPECTED RESULTS	
We expect the control group to show a continuum in the acceptance/rejection rates of pseudo-words, starting with massively rejecting pseudo-words with categorical violations and being more flexible in accepting pseudo-words with thematic violations (e.g. positive answers that the pseudo-word could belong to the Slovenian vocabulary). A different pattern is expected for the patient: we expect the patient to accept more pseudo-words as possible ones, thus, making more errors, since lexical representations will already be in decay and the patient will therefore exhibit difficulties at certain stage of the four-stage processing of pseudo-words.

REFERENCES 
[1] Libben, G.: The role of hierarchical morphological structure: a case study. Journal of Neurolinguistics (1994), Volume: 8, Issue: 1, Pages: 49-55.

[2] Manouilidou, C.: Thematic constraints in deverbal word formation: psycholinguistic evidence from the processing of pseudo words. Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Greek Linguistics, University of York, UK (2007). 

[3] Taler, V.,  Phillips, N.A. Language performance in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment: A comparative review. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology (2007), Volume:30, Issue: 5, Pages: 1-56.

