... title: Cognitive and Metacognitive Approaches to Mathematical Learning Disorder – A Case Study



Abstract

Mathematical knowledge is highly valued in our society. Mathematics can be useful in many different areas, such as researching the way humans manipulate information. Siegler and colleagues [1] designed a model of distribution of associations, which tells us how we study mathematics and how single combinations of numbers are represented in the long-term memory, which enables us to recall the solution and strategy of solving an arithmetical problem immediately. But pupils with dyscalculia or with lower cognitive abilities usually exhibit struggling with understanding number words and numerals (and the relation between them) and/or difficulties when carrying out mental arithmetic or solving 'word problems', etc. Dyscalculia is defined as a specific learning disability or difficulty in mathematics as a result of an impairment of particular parts of the brain involved in mathematical cognition, but without a general difficulty in cognitive functioning [2]. There are many signs and symptoms of dyscalculia, difficulties with: i) understanding of concepts (quantities, number lines etc.); ii) understanding and solving context-based mathematical tasks; iii) sequencing data or events; iv) using suitable steps when making calculations; v) understanding of division and fractions; vi) handling the money; vii) identifying useful procedures when dealing with addition, subtraction, division and multiplication; viii) combining concepts with mathematical procedures; ix) understanding concepts related to time perception; x) organizing written tasks and keeping stability of an equation. All of those symptoms are seen in persons with lower cognitive abilities, which makes it hard to reliably diagnose dyscalculia. 
The goal of our case study is to identify mathematical learning difficulties (dyscalculia) in our participant via a systematic interview technique about her cognitive processing. She seems to have great problems when dealing with number sense and some other symptoms that are typical for dyscalculia. We found out that she fails when given a task of adding up 3 and 5, while she is able to successfully solve quadratic equations. However, to accomplish the later she has followed a learned step by step procedure, which she didn't really comprehend. Our aim is to find the point at which she has failed to acquire some facts or concepts that are crucial to numeracy development. Training will start at that point, using a structured multi-sensory approach which uses real objects to explore mathematical ideas with the participant, discussing what she is doing. We will apply Polya's model of strategies of solving mathematical problems and Zimmerman's Self-regulation empowerment program.
!!References:
[1] R. S. Siegler, E. Jenkins. Children Discover new Strategies. Erlbaum, Hillsdale - New York, 1989.
[2] L. Kosc. "Developmental Dyscalculia." Journal of Learning Disabilities, vol. 7, pp. 164-77, 1974.
[3] S. Tancig. "Razvoj matematične kognicije." Časopis za kritiko znanosti, vol. 188, pp. 259-266, 1998.

