... title: German noun plural formation by children with specific language impairment compared to typically developing peers: the role of productivity



Abstract

The aim of this study is to gain a more systematic understanding of the acquisition of the German noun plural by children with and without specific language impairment (SLI). The data coming from a production experiment will provide further empirical evidence for the role of morphological processing. Furthermore, this study will contribute to clarifying the divergent positions existing in the literature, on the question whether SLI children have difficulties with noun plural formation (cf. Kauschke et al., 2011).
The German plural system consists of seven plural markers: -s, -(e)n, -e, -e+Umlaut (stem vowel change), zero morpheme, pure Umlaut and -er+Umlaut. Children do not systematically and at once acquire the “correct” plural forms, but produce erroneous forms during their development. Current theories try to explain those productions by different morphological properties of the nouns. For this study we will use the productivity scale (cf. Laaha et al., 2006) which has been shown to predict the morphological patterns observed in typically developing (TD) children. Productivity combines the type of plural marker, the gender of the noun (feminine, masculine or neuter) as well as the word-final phonology of the singular noun. 
The data analyzed come from a production experiment in which 62 Austrian kindergarten and school children were involved, out of which 8 were diagnosed as exhibiting SLI. The age of the children ranged from 3 to 9 years; all SLI children were either 5 or 8 years old. The experiment was a classical plural elicitation task in which children were asked orally and individually to give the plural form of 42 singular items, balanced for the seven plural markers and for item gender.
A global analysis of the number of correct responses shows that they increase with age, and when compared by age group, SLI children present a lower number of correct responses. The seven plural markers differ in their correct scores: -e+U, -er+U and -e(n) had the highest score in both groups. The main difference between SLI children and TD children was observed for –s, where SLI children had a significantly lower number of correct responses. This result concurs with the result reported in Kauschke et al., 2011; for younger SLI children. Moreover, SLI children show a different distribution of correct responses by productivity which can be explained by a different impact of phonological factors on morphological production in these children.

