... title: Introducing elements of cognitive models into an agent-based model of emotion trajectories of chat-like online environments



Abstract

The aim of the work is to propose an agent-based model that models emotion trajectories in chat-like communities. We study the behavior of collective emotions based on data from real online interactions. Considering the reaction of users of online communities to a special event such as the release of a new fancy product from a company expected to set new trends, is a good example for how a prediction of such an emotional reaction of people to a new event could be important and useful. Based on available data we model and predict emotional behaviors of single users in chat-like online communities and based on that also group behavior of a collective of users. This phenomenon also requires an interdisciplinary approach involving research in psychology (emotions), sociology (group behavior), physics (establishing theoretical perspective), computer science (modeling). The reference data will be IRC-conversations.

The work aims at understanding the dynamics of collective emotions in online communities. An important source for this objective is the work of F. Schweitzer & D. Garcia [Schweitzer2010] which describes a framework for modeling the emergence of collective emotions. This framework uses the concept of “Brownian agents” in which individual emotions are reduced to two internal states called valence and arousal. Using the modeling tool of Brownian agents, the change of values of internal variables is described using stochastic dynamics.

I use Schweitzer's work as reference, I extend the modeling of individuals with further concepts from cognitive modeling and emotion theory, as a first step: expectations (for appraisal) and coping strategies to model the update of internal states based on the affective relevance of external events and the decisions for sending events based on the detected relevance. [Rank2010]

In the reference model of Brownian agents, the value called valence represents an agent's positive or negative evaluation of the current situation, and arousal represents the personal activity level induced by that situation. Note that the use of these two terms in that way does not directly correspond to the notions used in emotion psychology where they refer not to situations but to single emotional experiences, rather the two values were chosen for modeling reasons based on available data. Another important property of the representations of valence and arousal in this model is decay, which causes a relaxation into an equilibrium state if no internal neither external excitation is given.

To be able to model agent's emotions, we need a way to detect relevant features in our data. One way how to infer internal emotional states is by monitoring human physiological signals. In our case, online communities do not provide a tool for direct measuring physiological signal of users. The only channel available in order to infer internal emotional states of users is processing content of written text authored by online users in the context of the temporal sequence of texts (data). The research field focusing on sentiment classification from text is called sentiment mining. As sentiment mining directly influences results of the experiment, it is an important part of it. However, the aim of this work does not include sentiment mining research proper, so we use already existing sentiment mining tools available to us, one of them is called SentiStrength [Thelwall2010], which can extract positive and negative emotional values from a given text. The extraction of an agent arousal is not so straightforward.

[Schweitzer2010] describes a modeling framework for research on the emergence of collective emotions. We can use that as a reference to determine some parameter values, as well as for comparing results of our model regarding collective states of whole groups, i.e. collective emotion.
This model, however, is considered with modeling the emotional trajectories of the single agents in a group, i.e. the evolution of the internal states of individual agents, i.e. as a reference to other models valence and arousal which represent emotional states of agents, but mainly expectations and other cognitive elements. Going through a history of an agent communication we can observe agents' behavior for different events – messages (new ones or already known ones) in different emotional states of agents. This behavior of an agent in a variety of situations indicates an agent's coping strategy in such situations.  By the observation we can define an agent personality, so that each agent is a different individual or a member of a particular group.  Here, an agent personality represents an “n-dimensional table”, where the dimensions of the table correspond to expected conditions (settings) for choosing a coping strategy of an agent in a specific situation. A priori, we can assume that the necessary dimensions are “current emotional states”, “topics” and “emotional values of messages”, “an author of a message” and “timing” (the latter also covering the absence of events). We also consider an agent personality update in case of new topics of messages. The personality and the emotional state of an agent represents its internal states which we model.

Using available data as an initialization of a model and then generating group behavior based on these  parameters, we are able to investigate the “emotional trajectories” of the modeled values. The final aim of this work is to analyze the change in emotional states of the whole group in successive time windows. The steps taken here form the part of generating group behavior based on a model of individual emotional response.

References:

[Schweitzer2010] Schweitzer, F. Garcia, K. 2010. An agent-based model of collective emotions in online communities. The European Physical Journal B - Condensed Matter and Complex Systems 77:533–545

[Thelwall2010] Thelwall, M. Buckley, K. Paltoglou, G. Cai, D. and Kappas, A., 2010. Sentiment strength detection in short informal text. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 61(12), 2544–2558.

[Rank2010] S. Rank (2010). Docking agent-based simulation of collective emotion to equation-based models and interactive agents. InProceedings of the 2010 Spring Simulation Multiconference, New York, NY, USA. ACM

