... title: Social Factors in Decision Making about Vaccination



Abstract

!!!! Social Factors in Decision Making about Vaccination

We examined the influence of emotional subtleness of different messages about vaccination on participants’ willingness to get vaccinated.
The aim of our study is to deepen our understanding of how vaccination decision 
making process works and what kind of messaging is the most effective with respect to 
vaccination.

Previous research has found that out of four different types of messages regarding 
vaccination, none were successful at increasing participants' vaccination willingness [1]. 
The authors have subsequently highligted the role of emotional impact of vaccination 
messages, hypothesizing that the inefficiency of vaccination messages might have been 
caused by high level of emotionality in the vaccination messages. They claimed that 
if emotional information were presented in a more subtle way, this would not lead to 
participants‘ rejection of vaccination. Therefore, we manipulated the level of emotional 
subtleness in order to see whether this factor would indeed have an influence on 
vaccination willingness. 

!! Experimental design
Two of the four types of messages from [1] were used:
* Message about research disproving particular alleged adverse effect of a particular vaccine
* Message emphasizing risks of a particular vaccine-preventable disease

Each message type has 4 different levels of emotional subtleness, which was manipulated by emotionally charged adjectives in the text of the messages. 
Higher level of emotional strength is established by adding new emotionally charged 
adjectives, or providing stronger emotionally charged adjectives.
All participants were presented with both types of messages, and randomly assigned 
to one of 4 possible levels of emotional subtleness per message type. After reading a 
message, participants were asked to report their willingness to vaccinate themselves and 
willingness to vaccinate their children, both on a scale between 0 and 10. 

Participants have been recruited online, via several discussion fora on Slovak websites.

!! Results

Preliminary results indicate that in line with hypotheses:
* Emotionality of vaccination messages does change participants’ willingness to vaccinate
* There is a peak of emotionality, after which adding emotional strength becomes 
counterproductive, concerning the message acceptance.
* Significant difference exists between the willingness to vaccinate self and (potential) 
child.

!! Acknowledgements
I want to thank Miroslav Heriban and Richard Dinga for consultations.
The biggest thanks go to my supervisor Jana Basnakova for all the time and effort she has invested in this project.

[1] B. Nyhan et al., “Effective Messages in Vaccine Promotion: A Randomized Trial,” Pediatrics, Am Acad Pediatrics, 2014.

